=== PDF PAGE 1 (1-based) ===
 
                                                                    
 
 
 
 
This document consists of 12 printed pages. 
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 
 
[Turn over 
 
Cambridge International AS & A Level 
 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 9618/11 
Paper 1 Theory Fundamentals May/June 2025 
MARK SCHEME 
Maximum Mark: 75 
 
 
Published 
 
 
This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and candidates, to indicate the requirements of the 
examination. It shows the basis on which Examiners were instructed to award marks. It does not indicate the 
details of the discussions that took place at an Examiners’ meeting before marking began, which woul d have 
considered the acceptability of alternative answers. 
 
Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the question paper and the Principal Examiner Report for 
Teachers. 
 
Cambridge International will not enter into discussions about these mark schemes. 
 
Cambridge International is publishing the mark schemes for the May/June 2025 series for most 
Cambridge IGCSE, Cambridge International A and AS Level components, and some Cambridge O Level 
components. 
 
 
 

=== PDF PAGE 2 (1-based) ===
9618/11 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 2 of 12  
 
Generic Marking Principles 
 
These general marking principles must be applied by all examiners when marking candidate answers. 
They should be applied alongside the specific content of the mark scheme or generic level 
descriptions for a question. Each question paper and mark scheme will also comply with these 
marking principles. 
 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 1: 
 
Marks must be awarded in line with: 
 
• the specific content of the mark scheme or the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the specific skills defined in the mark scheme or in the generic level descriptors for the question 
• the standard of response required by a candidate as exemplified by the standardisation scripts. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 2: 
 
Marks awarded are always whole marks (not half marks, or other fractions). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 3: 
 
Marks must be awarded positively: 
 
• marks are awarded for correct/valid answers, as defined in the mark scheme. However, credit 
is given for valid answers which go beyond the scope of the syllabus and mark scheme, 
referring to your Team Leader as appropriate 
• marks are awarded when candidates clearly demonstrate what they know and can do 
• marks are not deducted for errors 
• marks are not deducted for omissions 
• answers should only be judged on the quality of spelling, punctuation and grammar when these 
features are specifically assessed by the question as indicated by the mark scheme. The 
meaning, however, should be unambiguous. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 4: 
 
Rules must be applied consistently, e.g. in situations where candidates have not followed 
instructions or in the application of generic level descriptors. 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 5: 
 
Marks should be awarded using the full range of marks defined in the mark scheme for the question 
(however; the use of the full mark range may be limited according to the quality of the candidate 
responses seen). 
GENERIC MARKING PRINCIPLE 6: 
 
Marks awarded are based solely on the requirements as defined in the mark scheme. Marks should 
not be awarded with grade thresholds or grade descriptors in mind. 
 
                                                               
 
  

=== PDF PAGE 3 (1-based) ===
9618/11 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 3 of 12  
 
Annotations guidance for centres 
 
Examiners use a system of annotations as a shorthand for communicating their marking decisions to 
one another. Examiners are trained during the standardisation process on how and when to use 
annotations. The purpose of annotations is to inform the standardisation and monitoring processes 
and guide the supervising examiners when they are checking the work of examiners within their team. 
The meaning of annotations and how they are used is specific to each component and is understood 
by all examiners who mark the component.  
 
We publish annotations in our mark schemes to help centres understand the annotations they may 
see on copies of scripts. Note that there may not be a direct correlation between the number of 
annotations on a script and the mark awarded. Similarly, the use of an annotation may not be an 
indication of the quality of the response.  
 
The annotations listed below were available to examiners marking this component in this series.  
 
Annotations 
 
Annotation Meaning 
 
Correct 
 Incorrect 
 
To indicate where a key word/phrase/code is missing. 
 
Not relevant or used to separate parts of an answer. 
 Indicates a part of the answer that is incorrect. 
Highlighter To draw attention to a particular aspect or to indicate where parts of an answer 
have been combined. 
 Too vague. 
 Repetition 
 No examples or not enough. 
 Benefit of Doubt. 
 Not Answered Question. 
 Indicates that work or a page has been seen including blank answer spaces and 
blank pages. 
 Follow through. 
 Ignore 
 
  


=== PDF PAGE 4 (1-based) ===
9618/11 Cambridge International AS & A Level – Mark Scheme 
PUBLISHED 
May/June 2025  
 
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025 Page 4 of 12  
 
Question Answer Marks 
1(a) 1 mark each: 
 
X = Q AND (NOT P OR R) 
 
Y = S XOR (Q NOR R) 
2 
1(b) 1 mark for first 4 rows, 1 mark for second 4 rows 
 
A B C Working space X 
0 0 0  1 
0 0 1  1 
0 1 0  0 
0 1 1  1 
1 0 0  0 
1 0 1  0 
1 1 0  1 
1 1 1  1 
 
2 
