140 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
5.1.2	 Operating system tasks
operating
system
hardware management
file management security management
memory management
process management
▲ Figure	5.3 Operating system tasks
Memory management
Memory management, as the name suggests, is the management of a 
computer’s main memory. This can be broken down into three parts: memory 
optimisation, memory organisation and memory protection .
Memory optimisation
Memory optimisation is used to determine how computer memory is allocated 
and deallocated when a number of applications are running simultaneously. 
It also determines where they are stored in memory. It must, therefore, 
keep track of all allocated memory and free memory available for use by 
applications. To maintain optimisation of memory, it will also swap data to 
and from the HDD or SSD.
Memory organisation
Memory organisation determines how much memory is allocated to an 
application, and how the memory can be split up in the most appropriate or 
efficient manner.
This can be done with the use of
» a single (contiguous) allocation, where all of the memory is made available 
to a single application. This is used by MS-DOS and by embedded systems
» partitioned allocation, where the memory is split up into contiguous 
partitions (or blocks) and memory management then allocates a partition 
(which can vary in size) to an application
» paged memory, which is similar to partitioned allocation, but each partition 
is of a fixed size. This is used by virtual memory systems
» segmented memory, which is different because memory blocks are not 
contiguous – each segment of memory will be a logical grouping of data 
(such as the data which may make up an array).
Memory protection
Memory protection ensures that two competing applications cannot use the 
same memory locations at the same time. If this was not done, data could 
be lost, applications could produce incorrect results, there could be security 
issues, or the computer may crash.
Memory protection and memory organisation are different aspects of an 
operating system. An operating system may use a typical type of memory 
organisation (for example, it may use paging or segmentation) but it is always 
important that no two applications can occupy the same part of memory. 
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   140 25/04/19   9:27 AM