xiii
IntRoDUCtIon
Communication
Communication is a core requirement of computer systems. It includes the 
ability to transfer data from one device or component to another and an 
understanding of the rules and methods that are used in this data transfer. 
Communication could range from the internal transfer of data within a 
computer system, to the transfer of a video across the internet.
Computer architecture and hardware
Computer architecture is the design of the internal operation of a computer 
system. It includes the rules that dictate how components and data are 
organised, how data are communicated between components, to allow hardware 
to function. There is a range of architectures – with different components and 
rules – that are appropriate for different scenarios. All computers comprise 
a combination of hardware components, ranging from internal components, 
such as the central processing unit (CPU) and main memory, to peripherals. To 
produce effective and efficient programs to run on hardware, it is important to 
understand how the components work independently and together to produce 
a system that can be used. Hardware needs software to be able to perform a 
task. Software allows hardware to become functional. This enables the user to 
communicate with the hardware to perform tasks. 
Data representation and structures
Computers use binary and understanding how a binary number can be 
interpreted in many different ways is important. Programming requires an 
understanding of how data can be organised for efficient access and/or transfer.
Additional support
The Programming Skills Workbook provides practice for the programming papers 
and includes exercises designed to give students the necessary experience 
of working in one of the three prescribed high-level programming languages: 
Java (Console mode), Visual Basic and Python (Console mode). It is a write-in 
workbook designed to be used throughout the course.
Answers to questions are available in the Online Teacher’s Guide.
457591_FM_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_i-xiv.indd   13 4/30/19   7:42 AM