198 8 Databases
8
Payroll Program
-  record description
-  validation rules
-  processing code
Sales Program
-  record description
-  validation rules
-  processing code
First Name
Second Name
Address
Phone Number
Staff Number
Record Structure
Name
Staff Number
Target Sales
Actual Sales
Record Structure
▲ Figure 8.1 File-based approach
Several problems have occurred using this file-based approach. The name of 
a member of staff and their staff number are stored twice. The way the staff 
name is stored is different for each program. If the staff number was changed 
by the payroll program and not by the sales program, these fields may contain 
different values for the same member of staff. The fields in the two files are 
also in a different order: the staff number is the fifth field in the payroll record 
and the second field in the sales file.
A file-based approach is limited because
» storage space is wasted when data items are duplicated by the separate 
applications and some data is redundant
» data can be altered by one application and not by another; it then becomes 
inconsistent
» enquiries available can depend on the structure of the data and the software 
used so the data is not independent.
ACTIVITY 8A
Match the problems with the payroll and sales system to the limitations of a 
file-based approach set out above.
8.1.2 The advantages of a relational database over a  
file-based approach
What is a database? There are many different definitions of a database, such as:
… A (large) collection of data items and links between them, structured in a way that 
allows it to be accessed by a number of different applications programs. The term is 
also used loosely to describe any collection of data. 
BCS Glossary of Computing, 14th Edition
… An electronic filing cabinet which allows the user to perform various tasks 
including: adding new empty files, inserting data into existing files, retrieving data 
from existing files, updating data in existing files and cross-referencing data in files.
An Introduction to Database Systems (sixth edition) by CJ Date
More straightforwardly, a database is a structured collection of items of 
data that can be accessed by different applications programs. Data stored in 
databases is structured as a collection of records, where each record is made 
up of fields containing data about the same ‘thing’. A relational database is a 
database in which the data items are linked by internal pointers.
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   198 25/04/19   10:01 AM