142 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Process management
A process is a program which is being run on a computer. Process management 
involves the allocation of resources and permits the sharing and exchange of 
data, thus allowing all processes to be fully synchronised (for example, by the 
scheduling of resources, resolution of software conflicts, use of queues and so 
on). This is covered in more depth in Chapter 16.
Hardware management
Hardware management involves all input and output peripheral devices.
The functions of hardware management include
» communicating with all input and output devices using device drivers
» translating data from a file (defined by the operating system) into a format 
that the input/output device can understand using device drivers
» ensuring each hardware resource has a priority so that it can be used and 
released as required.
The management of input/output devices is essentially the control and 
management of queues and buffers. For example, when printing out a 
document, the printer management
» locates and loads the printer driver into memory
» sends data to a printer buffer ready for printing
» sends data to a printer queue (if the printer is busy or the print job has a 
low priority) before sending to the printer buffer
» sends various control commands to the printer throughout the printing 
process
» receives and handles error messages and interrupts from the printer.
File management
The main tasks of file management include
» defining the file naming conventions which can be used (filename.docx, 
where the extension can be .bat, .htm, .dbf, .txt, .xls, and so on)
» performing specific tasks, such as create, open, close, delete, rename, copy, 
move
» maintaining the directory structures
» ensuring access control mechanisms are maintained, such as access rights to 
files, password protection, making files available for editing, locking files, 
and so on
» specifying the logical file storage format (such as FAT or NTFS if Windows  
is being used), depending on which type of disk formatter is used  
(see Section 5.1.3)
» ensuring memory allocation for a file by reading it from the HDD/SSD and 
loading it into memory.
EXTENSION	ACTIVITY	5B
Write down the tasks carried out by a keyboard manager when a user types 
text using a word processor. Consider the use of buffers and queues in your 
ans wer.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   142 25/04/19   9:27 AM