46
2
	 2	CommuniCation
They are often used to connect a number of devices to form a local area 
network (LAN), for example a star network (see Section 2.1.3). A hub’s  
main task is to take any data packet (a group of data being transmitted) 
received at one of its ports and then send the data to every computer  
in the network. Using hubs is not a very secure method of data distribution 
and is also wasteful of bandwidth. Note that hubs can be wired or  
wireless devices.
Switch
Switches are similar to hubs, but are more efficient in the way they distribute 
the data packet. As with hubs, they connect a number of devices or computers 
together to form a LAN (for example, a star network).
However, unlike a hub, the switch checks the data packet received and works 
out its destination address (or addresses) and sends the data to the appropriate 
computer(s) only. This makes using a switch a more secure and efficient way of 
distributing data.
computer
computer
computer
computer
data packet sent to network
SWITCH
data sent out only to
the appropriate
computers on the
network
▲	Figure	2.14 Switch flow diagram
Each device or computer on a network has a media access control (MAC) address 
which identifies it uniquely. Data packets sent to switches will have a MAC 
address identifying the source of the data and additional addresses identifying 
each device which should receive the data. Note that switches can be wired or 
wireless devices.
Repeater
When signals are sent over long distances, they suffer attenuation or signal 
loss. Repeaters are devices which are added to transmission systems to 
boost the signal so it can travel greater distances. They amplify signals on 
both analogue (copper cable) and digital (fibre optic cable) communication 
links.
Repeaters can also be used on wireless systems. These are used to boost 
signals to prevent any ‘dead spots’ in the Wi-Fi zone. These devices plug into 
electric wall sockets and send out booster signals. They are termed non-logical 
devices because they will boost all signals which have been detected; they are 
not selective.
Sometimes, hubs contain repeaters and are known as repeating hubs. All 
signals fed to the hub are boosted before being sent to all devices in the 
network, thus increasing the operational range.
There are two main drawbacks of repeating hubs:
1
 They have only one collision domain. When the signals are boosted and  
then broadcast to devices, any collisions which might occur are not resolved 
there and then. One way to deal with this problem is to make use of 
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   46 4/30/19   7:45 AM