199
8.1 Database concepts
8
Using the same example as previously, a business keeps a database for payroll 
and sales data. A payroll application is used for the payroll and a sales 
processing application is used for sales. 
Tables Design
Payroll Application
Sales Application
Validation Rules
Users and
Access Rights
Data
▲ Figure 8.2 Database approach
The problems that occurred using the file-based approach have been solved. 
The name of a member of staff and their staff number are only stored once. So, 
any changes made to the data by the payroll application will be seen by the 
sales processing application and vice versa. The fields are the same and in the 
same order.
A database approach is beneficial because
» storage space is not wasted as data items are only stored once, meaning 
little or no redundant data
» data altered in one application is available in another application, so the 
data is consistent
» enquiries available are not dependent on the structure of the data and the 
software used, so the data is independent.
8.1.3 Relational database model terminology
In order to rigorously define the structure of a relational database we need to be 
able to understand and use the terminology associated with a relational database.
A relational database data structure can look similar to a file-based structure 
as it also consists of records and fields. A table  is a group of similar data, 
in a database, with rows for each instance of an entity and columns for each 
attribute. A record is a row in a table in a database. A field is a column in a 
table in a database.
For example, a database of students in a school could contain the table 
Student with a record for each student that contains the fields First Name, 
Second Name, Date of Birth and Class ID.
First Name Second Name Date Of Birth Class ID
Noor Baig 09/22/2010 7A ← row is a record
Ahmed Sayed 06/11/2010 7B
Tahir Hassan 01/30/2011 7A
↑
column is a field
▲ Table 8.1 Part of a student table
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   199 25/04/19   10:01 AM