138 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
5.1.1	 The need for an operating system 
Early computers had no operating system at all. Control software had to be 
loaded each time the computer was started – this was done using either paper 
tape or punched cards.
In the 1970s, the home computer was becoming increasingly popular. Early 
examples, such as the Acorn BBC B, used an internal ROM chip to store part 
of the operating system. A cassette tape machine was also used to load the 
remainder of the operational software (see Figure 5.1). This was necessary to 
‘get the computer started’ and used a welcome cassette tape which had to be 
used each time the computer was turned on.
			
▲ Figure	5.1 An Acorn BBC B (left) and its cassette tape machine (right)
As the hard disk drive (HDD) was developed, operating systems were stored on 
the hard disk, and start-up of the motherboard was handled by the basic input/
output system (BIOS). Initially, the BIOS was stored on a ROM chip but, in 
modern computers, the BIOS contents are stored on a flash memory chip. The 
BIOS configuration is stored in CMOS memory (complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductor) which means it can be altered or deleted as required.
The required part of the operating system is copied into RAM – since operating 
systems are now so large, it would seriously affect a computer’s performance 
if it was all loaded into RAM at once. An operating system provides both the 
environment in which applications can be run, and a useable interface between 
humans and computer. An operating system also disguises the complexity 
of computer hardware. Common examples include Microsoft Windows
®, Apple 
Mac OS, Google Android and IOS (Apple mobile phones and tablets).
The human–computer interface (HCI) is usually achieved through a graphical 
user interface (GUI), although it is possible to use a command line interface 
(CLI) if the user wishes to directly communicate with the computer. 
A CLI requires a user to type instructions to choose options from menus, open 
software, and so on. There are often a number of commands that need to be 
typed; for example, to save or load a file. The user, therefore, has to learn a 
number of commands (which must be typed exactly with no errors) just to carry 
out basic operations. Furthermore, it takes time to key in commands every time 
an operation has to be carried out.
Program	library  – a library on a computer where 
programs and routines are stored which can be freely 
accessed by other software developers for use in their 
own programs.
Library
	program – a program stored in a library for 
future use by other programmers.
Library 	routine – a tested and ready-to-use routine 
available in the development system of a programming 
language that can be incorporated into a program.
Dynamic 	link	file	(DLL) – a library routine that can 
be linked to another program only at the run time 
stage.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   138 25/04/19   9:27 AM