121
4.2 Assembly language
4
WHAT	YOU	SHOULD	ALREADY	KNOW
Try these three questions before you start the 
second part of this chapter.
1	 a)  Name two types of low-level programming 
language.
b) Name the only type of programming 
language that a CPU recognises.
c) Why do programmers find writing in this 
type of programming language difficult?
2
 Find at least two different types of CPU and 
the language they use.
3 Look at your computer and/or laptop and/or 
phone and list the programming language(s) 
they use.
Key	terms
Machine	code – the programming language that the 
CPU uses.
Instruction  – a single operation performed by a CPU.
Assembly 	language – a low-level chip/machine specific 
programming language that uses mnemonics.
Opcode – short for operation code, the part of a 
machine code instruction that identifies the action the 
CPU will perform.
Operand – the part of a machine code instruction that 
identifies the data to be used by the CPU.
Source
	code – a computer program before translation 
into machine code.
Assembler  – a computer program that translates 
programming code written in assembly language into 
machine code. Assemblers can be one pass or two pass.
Instruction
	set – the complete set of machine code 
instructions used by a CPU.
Object
	code – a computer program after translation into 
machine code.
Addressing
	modes – different methods of using 
the operand part of a machine code instruction as a 
memory address.
Absolute	addressing – mode of addressing in which 
the contents of the memory location in the operand are 
used.
Direct
	addressing  – mode of addressing in which the 
contents of the memory location in the operand are 
used, which is the same as absolute addressing.
Indirect	addressing  – mode of addressing in which the 
contents of the contents of the memory location in the 
operand are used.
Indexed	addressing  – mode of addressing in which the 
contents of the memory location found by adding the 
contents of the index register (IR) to the address of the 
memory location in the operand are used.
Immediate
	addressing  – mode of addressing in which 
the value of the operand only is used.
Relative
	addressing – mode of addressing in which the 
memory address used is the current memory address 
added to the operand.
Symbolic	addressing – mode of addressing used in 
assembly language programming, where a label is used 
instead of a value.
4.2	 Assembly language
4 .2 .1	 Assembly language and machine code
The only programming language that a CPU can use is machine code . 
Every different type of computer/chip has its own set of machine code 
instructions . A computer program stored in main memory is a series of 
machine code instructions that the CPU can automatically carry out during 
the fetch-execute cycle. Each machine code instruction performs one simple 
task, for example, storing a value in a memory location at a specified 
address. Machine code is binary, it is sometimes displayed on a screen as 
hexadecimal so that human programmers can understand machine code 
instructions more easily.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   121 25/04/19   9:07 AM