113
4.1 Central processing unit (CPU) architecture
4
It is worth mentioning here the role of the system clock. The clock defines 
the clock cycle which synchronises all computer operations. As mentioned 
earlier, the control bus transmits timing signals, ensuring everything is fully 
synchronised. By increasing clock speed, the processing speed of the computer 
is also increased (a typical current value is 3.5
 GHz – which means 3.5 billion 
clock cycles a second). Although the speed of the computer may have been 
increased, it is not possible to say that a computer’s overall performance is 
necessarily increased by using a higher clock speed. Four other factors need to 
be considered.
1
 Width of the address bus and data bus can affect computer performance.
2 Overclocking: the clock speed can be changed by accessing the basic  
input/output system (BIOS) and altering the settings. However, using a 
clock speed higher than the computer was designed for can lead to problems, 
such as
–
 execution of instructions outside design limits, which can lead to  
seriously unsynchronised operations (in other words, an instruction is  
unable to complete in time before the next one is due to be executed) 
and the computer would frequently crash and become unstable
–
 serious overheating of the CPU leading to unreliable performance.
3 The use of cache memory can also improve processor performance. It is 
similar to RAM in that its contents are lost when the power is turned off. 
Cache uses SRAM (see Chapter 3) whereas most computers use DRAM for 
main memory. Therefore, cache memories will have faster access times, 
since there is no need to keep refreshing, which slows down access time. 
When a processor reads memory, it first checks out cache and then moves 
on to main memory if the required data is not there. Cache memory stores 
frequently used instructions and data that need to be accessed faster. This 
improves processor performance.
4
 The use of a different number of cores (one core is made up of an ALU, a 
CU and the registers) can improve computer performance. Many computers 
are dual core (the CPU is made up of two cores) or quad core (the CPU is 
made up of four cores). The idea of using more cores alleviates the need to 
continually increase clock speeds. However, doubling the number of cores 
does not necessarily double the computer’s performance since we have to 
take into account the need for the CPU to communicate with each core; this 
will reduce overall performance. For example
–
 dual core has one channel and needs the CPU to communicate with both 
cores, reducing some of the potential increase in its performance
–
 quad core has six channels and needs the CPU to communicate with all 
four cores, considerably reducing potential performance.
core 1 core 2 core 3 core 4
core 2core 1
▲ Figure	4.3 Two cores, one channel (left) and four cores, six channels (right)
All of these factors need to be taken into account when considering computer 
performance.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   113 25/04/19   9:07 AM