84 3 Hardware
3
» Some headsets also use infrared sensors to monitor eye movement (in 
addition to head movement), which allows the depth of field on the screen 
to be more realistic; an example of this is to make objects in the foreground 
appear fuzzy when the user’s eyes indicate they are looking into the 
distance (and vice versa).
Sensors
Sensors are input devices which read or measure physical properties, such as 
temperature, pressure, acidity, and so on.
Real data is analogue in nature – this means it is constantly changing and 
does not have a discrete value. Analogue data usually requires some form of 
interpretation, for example, the temperature shown on a mercury thermometer 
requires the user to look at the height of the mercury to work out the 
temperature. The temperature, therefore, can have an infinite number of values 
depending on the precision of how the height of the mercury is measured. 
Equally, an analogue clock requires the user to look at the hands on the clock 
face. The area swept out by the hands allows the number of hours and minutes 
to be interpreted. There are many other examples.
Computers cannot make any sense of these physical quantities and the data 
needs to be converted into a digital format. This is usually achieved by an 
analogue to digital converter (ADC). This device converts physical values into 
discrete digital values.
ADC
digital dataanalogue data
1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 ...
▲ Figure 3.19 Converting analogue data into digital data
When a computer is used to control devices, such as a motor or a valve, 
it is often necessary to use a digital to analogue converter (DAC), since 
these devices need analogue data to operate in many cases. Frequently, 
an actuator is used in these control applications. Although these are 
technically output devices, they are mentioned here since they are an 
integral part of the control system. An actuator is an electromechanical 
device such as a relay, solenoid or motor. Note that a solenoid is an example 
of a digital actuator as part of the device is connected to a computer which 
opens and closes a circuit as required. When energized, the solenoid may 
operate a plunger or armature to control, for example, a fuel injection 
system. Other actuators, such as motors and valves, may require a DAC so 
that they receive an electric current rather than a simple digital signal 
direct from the computer.
Notice the importance of (positive) feedback, which is where the output 
from the system can affect the next input. This is due to the fact that sensor 
readings may cause the microprocessor to alter a valve or a motor, for example, 
which will then change the next reading taken by the sensor. So the output 
from the microprocessor will impact on the next input received as it attempts 
to bring the system within the desired parameters.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   84 26/04/19   7:27 AM