74 3 Hardware
3
Removable hard disk drives are essentially HDDs that are external to the 
computer and can be connected to the computer using one of the USB ports. In 
this way, they can be used as back-up devices or as another way of transferring 
files between computers.
Solid state drives (SSD)
Latency is an issue in HDDs, as discussed earlier. Solid state drives (SSD) 
reduce this issue considerably. They have no moving parts and all data is 
retrieved at the same rate. They do not rely on magnetic properties. The most 
common type of solid state storage devices store data by controlling the 
movement of electrons within NAND chips. The data is stored as 0s and 1s in 
millions of tiny transistors (at each junction one transistor is called a floating 
gate and the other is called a control gate) within the chip. This effectively 
produces a non-volatile rewritable memory.
However, a number of solid state storage devices sometimes use electronically 
erasable PROM (EEPROM) technology. The main difference is the use of NOR chips 
rather than NAND. This makes them faster in operation but devices using EEPROM 
are considerably more expensive than those that use NAND technology. EEPROM also 
allows data to be read or erased in single bytes at a time. Use of NAND only allows 
blocks of data to be read or erased. This makes EEPROM technology more useful in 
certain applications where data needs to be accessed or erased in byte-size chunks.
Because of the cost implications, the majority of solid state storage devices 
use NAND technology. The two are usually distinguished by the terms flash 
memory (use NAND) and EEPROM (use NOR).
So, what are the main benefits of using an SSD rather than an HDD?
Solid state drives
» are more reliable (no moving parts to go wrong)
» are considerably lighter (which makes them suitable for laptops)
» do not have to ‘get up to speed’ before they work properly
» have a lower power consumption
» run much cooler than HDDs (both these points again make them very 
suitable for laptop computers)
» are very thin (because they have no moving parts)
» access data considerably faster.
The main drawback of SSD is the still unknown longevity of the technology. 
Most solid state storage devices are conservatively rated at only 20
 GB write 
operations per day over a three year period – this is known as SSD endurance. 
For this reason, SSD technology is not commonly used in servers, for example, 
where a huge number of write operations take place every day. However, this 
issue is being addressed by a number of manufacturers to improve the durability 
of these solid state systems and they are rapidly becoming more common in 
applications such as servers and cloud storage devices.
Note that it is also not possible to over-write existing data on a flash memory 
device; it is necessary to first erase the old data and then write the new data 
at the same location.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3B
The length of a track on each disk in an HDD disk pack becomes much 
shorter towards the centre of the disk. Find out how manufacturers have 
overcome this issue with regards to disk data capacity and data access time.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   74 26/04/19   7:27 AM