145
5.1 Operating systems
5
We get the following.
track 8: File 1File 1 File 3
▲ Figure	5.6
File 1 has been extended to write data in sectors 10 and 11. 
Now, suppose file 3 is extended with the equivalent of 3.25 blocks of data. This 
requires filling up sector 9 and then moving to some empty sectors to write the 
remainder of the data – the next free sectors are on track 11.
track 8: File 1File 1 File 3
track 11: File 3
▲ Figure	5.7
If this continues, the files just become more and more scattered throughout 
the disk surfaces. It is possible for sectors 4, 5 and 6 (on track 8) to eventually 
become used if the disk starts to fill up and it has to use up whatever space 
is available. A disk defragmenter will rearrange the blocks of data to store 
files in contiguous sectors wherever possible; however, if the disk drive 
is almost full, defragmentation may not work. Assuming we can carry out 
defragmentation, then track 8 now becomes:
track 8: File 1 File 3
▲ Figure	5.8
This allows for much faster data access and retrieval since the HDD now requires 
fewer read-write head movements to access and read files 1 and 3. Some 
defragmenters also carry out clean up operations. Data blocks can become 
damaged after several read/write operations (this is different to bad sectors). If 
this happens, they are flagged as ‘unusable’ and any subsequent write operation 
will avoid writing data to data blocks which have become affected.
Disk content analysis/repair software
The concept of disk repair software was discussed in the above section. Disk 
content analysis software is used to check disk drives for empty space and 
disk usage by reviewing files and file folders. This can lead to optimal use 
of disk space by the removal of unwanted files and downloads (such as the 
deletion of auto saving files, cookies, download files, and so on).
Disk compression and file compression
File compression is essential to save storage space and make it quicker to 
download/upload files and quicker to send files via email. It was discussed in 
Chapter 1.
Disk compression is much less common these days due to the vast size of HDDs 
(often more than 2
 TB). The disk compression utility compresses data before 
writing it to hard disk (and decompresses it again when reading this data). It is 
a high priority utility and will essentially override all other operating system 
routines – this is essential because all applications need to have access to the 
HDD. It is important not to uninstall disk compression software since this would 
render any previously saved data to be unreadable.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   145 25/04/19   9:27 AM