72 3 Hardware
3
» often used to store data which the computer needs to access when powering 
up for the first time for example, the basic input/output system (BIOS).
Table 3.2 summarises the main differences between RAM and ROM.
RAM ROM
n temporary memory device
n volatile memory
n can be written to and read from
n used to store data, files, programs, part 
of OS currently in use
n can be increased in size to improve 
operational speed of a computer
n permanent memory device
n non-volatile memory device
n data stored cannot be altered
n sometimes used to store BIOS and other 
data needed at start up
▲ Table 3.2 Differences between RAM and ROM
PROM and EPROM
A programmable read-only memory (PROM) is a type of ROM chip that 
can be altered once. A PROM is made up of a matrix of fuses. Programming 
a PROM requires the use of a PROM writer which uses an electric current to 
alter specific cells by ‘burning’ fuses in the matrix. Due to the method of 
programming (writing), a PROM can only be written to once. They are often 
used in mobile phones and in RFID tags.
An erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM) is different to a PROM 
because they use floating gate transistors and capacitors rather than fuses. 
Ultra violet (UV) light is used to program an EPROM through a quartz window. 
They are used in applications which are under development, such as the 
programming of new games consoles.
Embedded systems
Embedded systems involve installing microprocessors into devices to enable 
operations to be controlled in a more efficient way. Devices such as cookers, 
refrigerators and central heating systems can now all be activated by a 
  
web-enabled device (such as a mobile phone or tablet). The time a central 
heating system switches on or off and the temperature can all be set from an 
app on a mobile phone from anywhere in the world.
There are pros and cons of devices being controlled in this manner, as shown in 
Table 3.3.
Pros of embedded systems Cons of embedded systems
n small in size and therefore easy to 
fit into devices
n relatively low cost to make
n usually dedicated to one task, 
making for simple interfaces 
and often no requirement of an 
operating system
n consume very little power
n very fast reaction to changing input 
(operate in real time)
n with mass production comes 
reliability
n difficult to upgrade devices to take 
advantage of new technology
n troubleshooting faults in the device 
becomes a specialist task
n although the interface can appear to be 
simple, in reality it can be more confusing 
(changing the time on a cooker clock can 
require several steps, for example)
n any device that can be accessed over the 
internet is also open to hackers, viruses, 
and so on
n due to the difficulty in upgrading and fault 
finding, devices are often just thrown away 
rather than being repaired (wasteful)
▲ Table 3.3 Pros and cons of controlling devices with embedded systems
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   72 26/04/19   7:27 AM