146 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Back-up software
While it is sensible to take manual back-ups using, for example, a memory stick 
or portable HDD, it is also good practice to use the operating system back-up 
utility. This utility will
» allow a schedule for backing up files to be made
» only carry out a back-up procedure if there have been any changes made to a file.
For total security, there should be three versions of a file:
1 The current (working) version stored on the internal HDD.
2 A locally backed up copy of the file (stored on a portable SSD, for example).
3 A remote back-up version stored well away from the computer (using cloud 
storage, for example).
Windows environment offers the following facilities using the back-up utility:
» The ability to restore data, files or the computer from the back-up (useful 
if there has been a problem and files have been lost and need to be 
recovered).
» The ability to create a restore point (this restores a computer to its state at 
some point in the past; this can be very useful if a very important file has 
been deleted and cannot be recovered by any of the other utilities).
» Options of where to save back-up files; this can be set up from the utility to 
ensure files are automatically backed up to a chosen device.
Windows uses File History, which takes snapshots of files and stores them on an 
external HDD at regular intervals. Over a period of time, File History  builds up a 
vast library of past versions of files – this allows a user to choose which version 
of the file they want to use. File History defaults to backing up every hour and 
retains past versions of files forever unless the user changes the settings.
Mac OS offers the Time Machine back-up utility. This erases the contents of a 
selected drive and replaces them with the contents from the back-up. To use 
this facility it is necessary to have an external HDD or SSD (connected via USB 
port) and ensure that the Time Machine utility is installed and activated on the 
selected computer. Time machine will automatically
» back up every hour
» keep daily back-ups for the past month, and
» keep weekly back-ups for all the previous months.
Note that once the back-up HDD or SSD is almost full, the oldest back-ups are 
deleted and replaced with the newest back-up data. Figure 5.9 shows the  
Time Machine message:
▲ Figure	5.9 Screen shot of Time Machine  message
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   146 25/04/19   9:27 AM