52
2
	 2	CommuniCation
EXTENSION	ACTIVITY	2D
Review Figure 2.20. As it stands, it is possible for an endless loop to be 
established.
Suggest a modification to the flow diagram to ensure it terminates if there is 
a problem with the data channel, or to prevent the data transmission holding 
up the computer for an unacceptable time period.
2 .1.8	 Bit streaming
Bit streaming is a contiguous sequence of digital bits sent over the internet 
or a network that requires a high speed data communication link (such as 
fast broadband). Since bit streaming often involves very large files (such as 
video) it is necessary for the files to undergo some data compression before 
transmission. It is also necessary to have some form of buffering to ensure 
smooth playback of the media files.
The data transmission rate from the file server (containing the video, for 
example) to the buffer must be greater than the rate at which data is 
transmitted from buffer to media player. The larger the buffer, the better the 
control over the bit rate being sent to the media player. The media player will 
always check to ensure data lies between a minimum value (often referred to as 
low water mark) and a maximum value (often referred to as a high water mark). 
The difference between the two values is usually about 80% of the total buffer 
capacity. The buffer is a temporary storage area of the computer.
source of
data stream
low high
buffer
media
player
bit streaming
from server
▲	Figure	2.21 Bit streaming
Table 2.7 shows the pros and cons of bit streaming.
Pros of bit streaming Cons of bit streaming
n no need to wait for a whole video or 
music file to be downloaded before the 
user can watch or listen
n no need to store large files on your 
device
n allows video files and music files to be 
played on demand (as required)
n no need for any specialist hardware
n affords piracy protection (more difficult 
to copy streamed files than files stored 
on a hard drive)
n cannot stream video or music files if 
broadband connection is lost
n video or music files will pause to allow 
the data being streamed to ‘catch up’ if 
there is insufficient buffer capacity or 
slow broadband connection
n streaming uses up a lot of bandwidth
n security risks associated with 
downloading files from the internet
n copyright issues
▲ Table	2.7 Pros and cons of bit streaming
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   52 4/30/19   7:45 AM