45
2.1 Networking
2
Wireless networking
» It is easier to expand networks and is not necessary to connect devices 
using cables.
» Devices have increased mobility, provided they are within range of the WAPs.
» Increased chance of interference from external sources.
» Data is less secure than with wired systems; it is easier to intercept 
radio waves and microwaves than cables so it is essential to protect data 
transmissions using encryption (such as WEP, WPA2).
» Data transmission rate is slower than wired networks (although it is improving).
» Signals can be stopped by thick walls (in old houses, for example) and signal 
strength can vary, or ‘drop out’.
Wired networking
» More reliable and stable network (wireless connectivity is often subjected to 
interference).
» Data transfer rates tend to be faster with no ‘dead spots’.
» Tends to be cheaper overall, in spite of the need to buy and install cable.
» Devices are not mobile; they must be close enough to allow for cable 
connections.
» Lots of wires can lead to tripping hazards, overheating of connections 
(potential fire risk) and disconnection of cables during routine office cleaning.
Other considerations
» If mobile phones and tablets are connected to the network, it will need to 
offer Wi-Fi or Bluetooth capability.
» There may be regulations in some countries regarding which wireless 
transmission frequencies can be used legally.
» Permission from authorities and land owners may be required before laying 
cables underground.
» There are numerous competing signals in the air around us; it is important to 
consider this when deciding whether to go for wired or wireless connectivity.
2 .1.6	 Hardware requirements of networks
In this section we will consider a number of hardware items needed to form a 
LAN network and the hardware needed to form a WAN. Please note
» the concept of the WLAN and the hardware needed to support it have been 
covered in earlier sections
» the hardware items hub and gateway have been included in this section to 
complete the picture; however, knowledge of these two items is not required 
by the syllabus.
Hub
Hubs are hardware devices that can have a number of devices or computers 
connected to them.
computer
computer
computer
computer
data packet sent to network
HUB
data sent out to all
computers on the
network
▲	Figure	2.13 Hub flow diagram
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   45 4/30/19   7:45 AM