181
7.1 Legal, moral, ethical and cultural implications
7
To help in this aim, the IEEE has also set out a code of ethics:
IEEE Code of Ethics
We, the members of the IEEE, in recognition of the importance of our technologies in affecting the quality of life 
throughout the world, and in accepting a personal obligation to our profession, its members, and the communities we 
serve, do hereby commit ourselves to the highest ethical and professional conduct and agree:
1
  to hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public, to strive to comply with ethical design and sustainable 
development practices, and to disclose promptly factors that might endanger the public or the environment;
2  to avoid real or perceived conflicts of interest whenever possible, and to disclose them to affected parties when 
they do exist;
3
 to be honest and realistic in stating claims or estimates based on available data;
4 to reject bribery in all its forms;
5  to improve the understanding by individuals and society of the capabilities and societal implications of conventional 
and emerging technologies, including intelligent systems;
6
  to maintain and improve our technical competence and to undertake technological tasks for others only if qualified 
by training or experience, or after full disclosure of pertinent limitations;
7
  to seek, accept, and offer honest criticism of technical work, to acknowledge and correct errors, and to credit 
properly the contributions of others;
8
  to treat fairly all persons and to not engage in acts of discrimination based on race, religion, gender, disability, 
age, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression;
9
  to avoid injuring others, their property, reputation, or employment by false or malicious action;
10  to assist colleagues and co-workers in their professional development and to support them in following this code of 
ethics.
Jointly with the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), the IEEE 
has also developed a set of eight principles which govern the code of ethics 
specifically among software engineers. The principles set out to ensure all 
engineers meet an acceptable and consistent code of ethics. There are certain 
expectations of the scientists and engineers from the general public as well 
as from their peers. The actual eight principles behind the code of ethics and 
professional practice were published way back in 1999.
An abridged version is shown below; a full version can be found at:
www.computer.org/web/education/code-of-ethics
Software Engineering Code of Ethics
1  PUBLIC – Software engineers shall act consistently with the public interest (contains 8 sub-clauses).
2  CLIENT AND EMPLOYER – Software engineers shall act in a manner that is in the best interests of their client and 
employer consistent with the public interest (contains 9 sub-clauses).
3  PRODUCT – Software engineers shall ensure that their products and related modifications meet the highest 
professional standards possible (contains 15 sub-clauses).
4
  JUDGEMENT – Software engineers shall maintain integrity and independence in their professional judgement 
(contains 6 sub-clauses).
5
  MANAGEMENT – Software engineering managers and leaders shall subscribe to and promote an ethical approach to 
the management of software development and maintenance (contains 12 sub-clauses).
6
  PROFESSION – Software engineers shall advance the integrity and reputation of the profession consistent with the 
public interest (contains 13 sub-clauses).
7
  COLLEAGUES – Software engineers shall be fair to and supportive of their colleagues (contains 8 sub-clauses).
8  SELF – Software engineers shall participate in life-long learning regarding the practice of their profession and shall 
promote an ethical approach to the practice of the profession (contains 9 sub-clauses).
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   181 25/04/19   9:52 AM