188 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
» use the source code to produce software which copies existing software 
which is subject to copyright laws
» adapt the source code in such a way that it infringes copyright laws 
protecting other software
» use the source code to produce software which is deemed offensive by third 
parties.
While the two organisations promote the same four freedoms, they have 
different basic philosophies.
Free Software Foundation focuses on what the recipient of the software is 
permitted to do with the software.
Open Source Initiative focuses on the practical consequences offered by the 
four freedoms; the aims are to provide effective collaboration on software 
development by the users. There are ten principles that have been developed to 
ensure the philosophy of the Open Source Initiative is adhered to: 
1
 Free Redistribution The license shall not restrict any party from selling 
or giving away the software as a component of an aggregate software 
distribution containing programs from several different sources. The license 
shall not require a royalty or other fee for such sale.
2
 Source Code The program must include source code and must allow 
distribution in source code as well as compiled form. Where some form of a 
product is not distributed with source code there must be a well-publicised 
means of obtaining the source code for no more than a reasonable reproduction 
cost, preferably downloading via the internet without charge. The source code 
must be the preferred form in which a programmer would modify the program. 
Deliberately obfuscated source code is not allowed. Intermediate forms such as 
the output of a preprocessor or translator are not allowed.
3
 Derived Works The license must allow modifications and derived works, and 
must allow them to be distributed under the same terms as the license of 
the original software.
4
 Integrity of The Author’s Source Code The license may restrict source-
code from being distributed in modified form only if the license allows the 
distribution of ‘patch files’ with the source code for the purpose of modifying 
the program at build time. The license must explicitly permit distribution of 
software built from modified source code. The license may require derived 
works to carry a different name or version number from the original software.
5
 No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups The license must not 
discriminate against any person or group of persons.
6 No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor The license must not 
restrict anyone from making use of the program in a specific field of 
endeavor. For example, it may not restrict the program from being used in a 
business, or from being used for genetic research.
7
 Distribution of License The rights attached to the program must apply to 
all to whom the program is redistributed without the need for execution of 
an additional license by those parties.
8
 License Must Not Be Specific to a Product The rights attached to the 
program must not depend on the program’s being part of a particular 
software distribution. If the program is extracted from that distribution and 
used or distributed within the terms of the program’s license, all parties to 
whom the program is redistributed should have the same rights as those 
that are granted in conjunction with the original software distribution.
9
 License Must Not Restrict Other Software  The license must not place 
restrictions on other software that is distributed along with the licensed 
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   188 25/04/19   9:52 AM