163
6.1 Data security
6
these cases, it is often referred to as a gateway. Alternatively, the firewall can 
be software installed on a computer, sometimes as part of the operating system.
However, sometimes the firewall cannot prevent potential harmful traffic. It 
cannot
» prevent individuals, on internal networks, using their own modems to  
by-pass the firewall
» control employee misconduct or carelessness (for example, control of 
passwords or user accounts)
» prevent users on stand-alone computers from disabling the firewall.
These issues require management and/or personal control to ensure the firewall 
can work effectively.
Antivirus software
Running antivirus software in the background on a computer will constantly 
check for virus attacks. Although different types of antivirus software work in 
different ways, they all
» check software or files before they are run or loaded on a computer
» compare possible viruses against a database of known viruses
» carry out heuristic checking (check software for behaviour that could 
indicate a virus, which is useful if software is infected by a virus not yet on 
the database)
» quarantine files or programs which are possibly infected and 
–
 allow the virus to be automatically deleted, or
– allow the user to make the decision about deletion (it is possible that 
the user knows that the file or program is not infected by a virus – this 
is known as a false positive and is one of the drawbacks of antivirus 
software).
Antivirus software needs to be kept up to date since new viruses are constantly 
being discovered. Full system checks need to be carried out regularly (once a 
week, for example), since some viruses lie dormant and would only be picked up 
by this full system scan.
Anti-spyware software
Anti-spyware software detects and removes spyware programs installed 
illegally on a user’s computer system. The software is either based on rules 
(it looks for typical features associated with spyware) or based on known file 
structures which can identify common spyware programs.
Encryption
If data on a computer has been accessed illegally (by a hacker, for example) it 
is possible to encrypt the data, making it virtually impossible to understand 
without encryption keys to decode it. This cannot stop a hacker from deleting 
the files, but it will stop them using the data for themselves. This is covered in 
more depth in Chapter 17.
Biometrics
In an attempt to stay one step ahead of hackers and malware writers, many 
modern computer devices use biometrics as part of the password system. 
Biometrics rely on the unique characteristics of human beings. Examples 
include fingerprint scans, retina scans (pattern of blood capillary structure), 
face recognition and voice recognition.
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   163 25/04/19   9:35 AM