137
5.1 Operating systems
5
Key	terms
CMOS – complementary metal-oxide semiconductor.
Operating 	system – software that provides an 
environment in which applications can run and provides 
an interface between hardware and human operators.
HCI – human–computer interface.
GUI – graphical user interface.
CLI – command line interface.
Icon – small picture or symbol used to represent, for 
example, an application on a screen.
WIMP – windows, icons, menu and pointing device.
Post-WIMP – interfaces that go beyond WIMP and use 
touch screen technology rather than a pointing device.
Pinching
	and	rotating – actions by fingers on a touch 
screen to carry out tasks such as move, enlarge, 
reduce, and so on.
Memory	management – part of the operating system 
that controls the main memory.
Memory
	optimisation  – function of memory 
management that determines how memory is allocated 
and deallocated.
Memory	organisation  – function of memory 
management that determines how much memory is 
allocated to an application.
Security 	management – part of the operating system 
that ensures the integrity, confidentiality and availability 
of data.
Contiguous  – items next to each other.
Virtual 	memory	systems – memory management (part 
of OS) that makes use of hardware and software to 
enable a computer to compensate for shortage of actual 
physical memory.
Memory
	protection  – function of memory management 
that ensures two competing applications cannot use 
same memory locations at the same time.
Process	management – part of the operating system 
that involves allocation of resources and permits the 
sharing and exchange of data.
Hardware 	management – part of the operating system 
that controls all input/output devices connected to 
a computer (made up of sub-management systems 
such as printer management, secondary storage 
management, and so on).
Device
	driver – software that communicates with the 
operating system and translates data into a format 
understood by the device.
Utility	program – parts of the operating system which 
carry out certain functions, such as virus checking, 
defragmentation or hard disk formatting.
Disk	formatter – utility that prepares a disk to allow 
data/files to be stored and retrieved.
Bad
	sector – a faulty sector on an HDD which can be 
soft or hard.
Antivirus
	software – software that quarantines and 
deletes files or programs infected by a virus (or other 
malware). It can be run in the background or initiated by 
the user.
Heuristic
	checking – checking of software for 
behaviour that could indicate a possible virus.
Quarantine  – file or program identified as being 
infected by a virus which has been isolated by  
antivirus software before it is deleted at a later  
stage.
False
	positive – a file or program identified by a virus 
checker as being infected but the user knows this 
cannot be correct.
Disk	defragmenter  – utility that reorganises the 
sectors on a hard disk so that files can be stored in 
contiguous data blocks.
Disk	content	analysis	software – utility that checks 
disk drives for empty space and disk usage by reviewing 
files and folders.
Disk	compression  – software that compresses data 
before storage on an HDD.
Back-up
	utility – software that makes copies of files on 
another portable storage device.
b) What are the pros and cons of both types 
of interface?
c) Who would use each type of interface?
4 Before the advent of the operating system, 
computers relied on considerable human 
intervention.
 Find out the methods used to start up early 
computers to prepare them for the day’s 
tasks.
5
 Describe the role of buffers  and interrupts 
when a printing job is being sent to an inkjet 
pr inter.
 Consider the different operational speeds of a 
processor and a printer, together with size of 
printing job and interrupt priorities.
 Describe potential error scenarios – such as 
paper jam, out of paper or out of ink – and 
how these could affect the printing job.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   137 25/04/19   9:27 AM