186 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
7.2 Copyright issues
Key terms
Piracy – the practice of using or making illegal copies 
of, for example, software.
Product key – security method used in software to 
protect against illegal copies or use.
Digital rights management  (DRM) – used to control the 
access to copyrighted material.
Free Software Foundation – organisation promoting the 
free distribution of software, giving users the freedom 
to run, copy, change or adapt the coding as needed.
Open Source Initiative – organisation offering the same 
freedoms as the Free Software Foundation, but with 
more of a focus on the practical consequences of the 
four shared rules, such as more collaborative software 
development.
Freeware – software that can be downloaded free of 
charge; however, it is covered by the usual copyright 
laws and cannot be modified; nor can the code be used 
for another purpose.
Shareware – software that is free of charge initially 
(free trial period). The full version of the software can 
only be downloaded once the full fee for the software 
has been paid.
7.2 .1 Software copyright and privacy
Software is protected by copyright laws in much the same way as music CDs, 
videos and articles from magazines and books are protected.
When software is purchased, there are certain rules that must be obeyed:
» It is illegal to make a software copy and sell it or give it away.
» Software cannot be used on a network or used on multiple computers 
without a multi-use licence.
» It is illegal to use coding from copyrighted software in your own software – 
and then pass this software on or sell it as your own – without the 
permission of the copyright holder.
» It is illegal to rent out a software package without permission to do so.
» It is illegal to use the name of copyrighted software on other software 
without agreement to do so.
Software piracy (making illegal copies of software) is a major issue among 
software companies. They take many steps to stop the illegal copying of 
software and to stop illegal copies being used once they have been sold:
» When software is being installed, the user will be asked to key in a unique 
reference number or product key (a string of letters and numbers) which 
was supplied with the original copy of the software (for example: 4a3c 0efa 
65ab a81e).
» The user will be asked to click a button or box which states they agree to 
the licence agreement before the software continues to install.
» The original software packaging often comes with a sticker informing the 
purchaser that it is illegal to make copies of the software; the label is often 
in the form of a hologram indicating that this is a genuine copy.
» Some software will only run if the CD-ROM, DVD-ROM or memory stick is actually 
in the drive; this stops illegal multiple use and network use of the software.
» Some software will only run if a dongle is plugged into one of the USB ports.
(See also Section 7.2.2 regarding further copyright protection using DRM.)
The Federation Against Software Theft (FAST) was set up in the UK to protect 
the software industry against piracy. FAST prosecutes organisations and 
individuals involved in any copyright infringements.
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   186 25/04/19   9:52 AM