119
4.1 Central processing unit (CPU) architecture
4
4 .1.7	 Interrupts
An interrupt is a signal sent from a device or from software to the processor. 
This will cause the processor to temporarily stop what it is doing and service 
the interrupt. Interrupts can be caused by, for example
» a timing signal
» input/output processes (a disk drive is ready to receive more data, for example)
» a hardware fault (an error has occurred such as a paper jam in a printer, for 
example)
» user interaction (the user pressed a key to interrupt the current process, 
such as <CTRL><ALT><BREAK>, for example)
» a software error that cannot be ignored (if an .exe file could not be found 
to initiate the execution of a program OR an attempt to divide by zero, for 
example).
Once the interrupt signal is received, the processor either carries on with 
what it was doing or stops to service the device/program that generated the 
interrupt. The computer needs to identify the interrupt type and also establish 
the level of interrupt priority. 
Interrupts allow computers to carry out many tasks or to have several windows 
open at the same time. An example would be downloading a file from the 
internet at the same time as listening to some music from the computer library. 
Whenever an interrupt is serviced, the status of the current task being run is 
saved. The contents of the program counter and other registers are saved. Then, 
the interrupt service routine (ISR) is executed by loading the start address 
into the program counter. Once the interrupt has been fully serviced, the status 
of the interrupted task is reinstated (contents of saved registers retrieved) and 
it continues from the point prior to the interrupt being sent.
ACTIVITY	4A	
1	 a)  Describe the functions of the following registers.
i) Current instruction register
ii) Memory address register
iii) Program counter
b) Status registers contain flags. Three such flags are named N, C and V.
i)
 What does each of the three flags represent?
ii) Give an example of the use of each of the three flags.
2	 a)  Name three buses used in the Von Neumann architecture.
b) Describe the function of each named bus.
c) Describe how bus width and clock speed can affect computer 
performance.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   119 25/04/19   9:07 AM