20
1
1 InformatIon representatIon and multImedIa 
Figure 1.6 shows a sound wave. The x-axis shows the time intervals when 
the sound was sampled (0 to 20), and the y-axis shows the amplitude of the 
sampled sound (the amplitudes above 10 and below 0 are filtered out in this 
example).
At time interval 1, the approximate amplitude is 9; at time interval 2, the 
approximate amplitude is 4, and so on for all 20 time intervals. Because the 
amplitude range in Figure 1.6 is 0 to 10, then 4 binary bits can be used to 
represent each amplitude value (for example, 9 would be represented by the 
binary value 1001). Increasing the number of possible values used to represent 
sound amplitude also increases the accuracy of the sampled sound (for 
example, using a range of 0 to 127 gives a much more accurate representation 
of the sound sample than using a range of, for example, 0 to 10). This is known 
as the sampling resolution (also known as the bit depth).
Sampling rate is the number of sound samples taken per second. The higher 
the sampling rate and/or sampling resolution, the greater the file size. For 
example, a 16-bit sampling resolution is used when recording CDs to give better 
sound quality.
So, how is sampling used to record a sound clip?
» The amplitude of the sound wave is first determined at set time intervals 
(the sampling rate).
» This gives an approximate representation of the sound wave.
» The sound wave is then encoded as a series of binary digits.
Using a higher sampling rate or larger resolution will result in a more faithful 
representation of the original sound source.
Pros Cons
larger dynamic range produces larger file size
better sound quality takes longer to transmit/download sound files
less sound distortion requires greater processing power
▲ Table 1.9 The pros and cons of using a larger sampling resolution when recording sound
Recorded sound is often edited using software. Common features of such 
software include the ability to
» edit the start/stop times and duration of a sample
» extract and save (or delete) part of a sample
» alter the frequency and amplitude of a sample
» fade in and fade out
» mix and/or merge multiple sound tracks or sources
» combine various sound sources together and alter their properties
» remove ‘noise’ to enhance one sound wave in a multiple of waves (for 
example, to identify and extract one person’s voice out of a group of people)
» convert between different audio formats.
1.2.4 Video
This section considers the use of video and extends beyond the syllabus. While 
this is not specifically mentioned in the syllabus, it has been included here 
for completeness. Many specialist video cameras exist. However, most digital 
cameras, smart phones and tablets are also capable of taking moving images by 
‘stitching’ a number of still photos (frames) together. They are often referred to 
as DV (digital video) cameras; they store compressed photo frames at a speed 
of 25
 MB per second – this is known as motion JPEG.
457591_01_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_001-026.indd   20 25/04/19   9:11 AM