187
7.2 Copyright issues
7
Similar organisations exist in other countries. The following extract from a 
newspaper article describes a typical example of how strict the anti-piracy laws 
are in some countries.
TRADERS FINED $100 000
Two eBay traders from the United States of America agreed this week to pay a total of 
$100 000 in damages after they were caught selling illegal copies of Norton security software.
The SIIA settled the case against the two traders who also agreed to stop selling illegal 
software and provided SIIA with records identifying their customers and suppliers.
7.2.2 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)
Digital rights management (DRM) was originally set up to control what devices 
a CD could play on. Preventing a CD from playing on a computer, for example, 
would help stop it being copied illegally. DRM has since been updated to cover 
more areas; it does this by using protection software to help stop the copying 
of, for example, music tracks, video files or ebooks. DRM creates restrictions that 
control what the users can do with the data. For example, allowing a music file 
to be streamed over the internet but not copied, allowing an ebook to be read on 
a tablet only, or a game requiring an internet connection to a certain website to 
work, and so on. The aim of DRM is to ensure that any attempt made to break the 
copyright protection will produce a defective copy which will not work.
When you buy a product protected by DRM, it may come with a key which 
licences a single user on one device and this key must be registered. Another 
example – of which there are many – is Apple Music’s use of DRM layers in 
streamed music to prevent a user downloading all the music in the first month 
of a subscription and then cancelling their subscription.
7.2.3 Software licensing
Commercial software
Commercial software is available to customers for a fee, providing a licence 
for one genuine copy to be used on a single device, or a multi-use licence for 
multiple users. Occasionally, software is offered free of charge if an earlier version 
was bought by the user. This type of software is fully copyright-protected and 
none of the code can be used without the prior consent of the copyright owner.
Free software and the Open Source Initiative
The Free Software Foundation and the Open Source Initiative are non-profit 
organisations that promote the benefits of giving users the freedom to run, 
copy, change and adapt software. Examples of software licensed in this way 
include: F-spot (photographic manager), Scribus (DTP/word processor) and 
LibreOffice (Office Suite). Users are allowed to follow the four freedoms:
» Run the software for any legal purpose they wish.
» Study the program source code and modify it where necessary to meet their 
needs.
» Redistribute copies of the software to friends and family.
» Distribute code modified by the user to friends and family.
Users do not need to seek permission to do the above since the software is not 
protected by copyright restrictions. However, there are still some rules that the 
user must adhere to. Users cannot
» add source code from another piece of software unless this is also described 
as free software or open source software
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   187 25/04/19   9:52 AM