40
2
	 2	CommuniCation
The same data is stored on more than one server in case of maintenance or 
repair, allowing clients to access data at any time. This is known as data 
redundancy. The physical environment is owned and managed by a hosting 
company.
There are three common systems, public cloud, private cloud and hybrid cloud.
Public cloud is a storage environment where the customer/client and cloud 
storage provider are different companies.
Private cloud is storage provided by a dedicated environment behind a 
company firewall. Customer/client and cloud storage provider are integrated 
and operate as a single entity.
Hybrid cloud is a combination of private and public clouds. Some data resides 
in the private cloud and less sensitive/less commercial data can be accessed 
from a public cloud storage provider.
Instead of saving data on a local hard disk or other storage device, a user can 
save their data ‘in the cloud’. The pros and cons of using cloud storage are 
shown in Table 2.3.
Pros of using cloud storage Cons of using cloud storage
n customer/client files stored on the cloud can be 
accessed at any time from any device anywhere in the 
world provided internet access is available
n no need for a customer/client to carry an external 
storage device with them, or use the same computer to 
store and retrieve information
n provides the user with remote back-up of data to aid 
data loss and disaster recovery
n recovers data if a customer/client has a hard disk or 
back-up device failure
n offers almost unlimited storage capacity
n if the customer/client has a slow or unstable internet 
connection, they would have problems accessing or 
downloading their data/files
n costs can be high if large storage capacity is required
n expensive to pay for high download/upload data 
transfer limits with the customer/client internet service 
provider (ISP)
n potential failure of the cloud storage company is 
possible – this poses a risk of loss of all back-up data
▲	Table	2.3 Summary of pros and cons of using cloud storage
Data security when using cloud storage 
Companies that transfer vast amounts of confidential data from their own 
systems to a cloud service provider are effectively relinquishing control of their 
own data security. This raises a number of questions:
» What physical security exists regarding the building where the data is housed?
» How good is the cloud service provider’s resistance to natural disasters or 
power cuts?
» What safeguards exist regarding personnel who work for the cloud service 
company? Can they use their authorisation codes to access confidential data 
for monetary purposes?
Potential data loss when using cloud storage
There is a risk that important and irreplaceable data could be lost from the 
cloud storage facilities. Actions from hackers (gaining access to accounts or 
pharming attacks, for example) could lead to loss or corruption of data. Users 
need to be certain sufficient safeguards exist to overcome these risks.
The following breaches of security involving some of the largest cloud service 
providers suggest why some people are nervous of using cloud storage for 
important files:
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   40 4/30/19   7:45 AM