53
2.1 Networking
2
Bit streaming can be either on demand or real time.
On demand
» Digital files stored on a server are converted to a bit streaming format 
(encoding takes place and the encoded files are uploaded to a server).
» A link to the encoded video/music file is placed on the web server to be 
downloaded.
» The user clicks on the link and the video/music file is downloaded in a 
contiguous bit stream.
» Because it is on demand, the streamed video/music is broadcast to the user 
as and when required.
» It is possible to pause, rewind and fast forward the video/music if required.
Real time
» An event is captured by camera and microphone and is sent to a computer.
» The video signal is converted (encoded) to a streaming media file.
» The encoded file is uploaded from the computer to the dedicated video 
streaming server.
» The server sends the encoded live video to the user’s device.
» Since the video footage is live it is not possible to pause, rewind or fast 
forward.
ACTIVITY	2B
1	 a)  Explain the differences between LAN, MAN and WAN.
b) Give three of the benefits of networking computers.
c) Explain the following terms.
i) Thick client
ii) Thin client
2	 a)  Draw diagrams to show the following network topologies.
i)
 Bus
ii) Star
iii) Mesh 
b) Give one benefit and one drawback of using each type of network 
topology.
3	 a)  Explain the differences between public and private cloud computing.
b) Give two benefits of using cloud computing.
c) Give two drawbacks of using cloud computing.
4 You have been asked by a manager to write a report on whether a 
LAN being set up in their new building should use wired or wireless 
connectivity. The building has 20 floors.
 Explain your arguments for and against using both types of connectivity 
and draw a conclusion to help the manager make their decision.
5	 a)
 What is meant by bit streaming?
b) Why is it necessary to use buffers whilst streaming a video from the 
internet?
c)
 Explain the differences between on demand and real time bit streaming.
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   53 4/30/19   7:45 AM