41
2.1 Networking
2
» The XEN security threat, which forced several cloud operators to reboot 
all their cloud servers, was caused by a problem in the XEN hypervisor 
(a hypervisor is a piece of computer software, firmware or hardware that 
creates and runs virtual machines).
» A large cloud service provider permanently lost data during a routine  
back-up procedure.
» The celebrity photos cloud hacking scandal, in which more than 100 private 
photos of celebrities were leaked. Hackers had gained access to a number of 
cloud accounts, which then enabled them to publish the photos on social 
networks and sell them to publishing companies.
» In 2016, the National Electoral Institute of Mexico suffered a cloud security 
breach in which 93 million voter registrations, stored on a central database, 
were compromised and became publicly available to everyone. To make 
matters worse, much of the information on this database was also linked to 
an Amazon cloud server outside Mexico.
Cloud software
Cloud storage is, of course, only one aspect of cloud computing. Other areas 
covered by cloud computing include databases, networking, software and 
analytical services using the internet.
Here we will consider cloud software – you can research for yourself how 
databases and analytical services are provided by cloud computing services.
Software applications can be delivered to a user’s computer on demand using 
cloud computing services. The cloud provider will both host and manage 
software applications – this will include maintenance, software upgrades and 
security for a monthly fee. A user will simply connect to the internet (using 
their web browser on a computer or tablet or mobile phone) and contact their 
cloud services supplier. The cloud services supplier will connect them to the 
software application they require.
The main advantages are that the software will be fully tested and it does not 
need to reside on the user’s device. However, the user can still use the software 
even if the internet connection is lost. Data will simply be stored on the 
local device and then data will be uploaded or downloaded once the internet 
connection is restored.
Cloud-based applications can, therefore, perform tasks on a local device. This 
makes them fundamentally different to web-based apps which need an internet 
connection at all times.
2 .1.5	 Wired and wireless networking
Wireless
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
Both Wi-Fi and Bluetooth offer wireless communication between devices. They 
both use electromagnetic radiation as the carrier of data transmission.
Bluetooth sends and receives radio waves in a band of 79 different frequencies 
(known as channels). These are all centred on a 2.45 GHz frequency. Devices 
using Bluetooth automatically detect and connect to each other, but they do 
not interfere with other devices since each communicating pair uses a different 
channel (from the 79 options).
When a device wants to communicate, it picks one of the 79 channels at 
random. If the channel is already being used, it randomly picks another 
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   41 4/30/19   7:45 AM