144 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Virus checkers
Any computer (including mobile phones and tablets) can be subject to a virus 
attack (see Chapter 6). 
There are many ways to help prevent viruses, such as being careful when 
downloading material from the internet, not opening files or links in emails 
from unknown senders, and by only using certified software. However, virus 
checkers – which are offered by operating systems – still provide the best 
defence against malware, as long as they are kept up to date and constantly run 
in the background.
Running antivirus software in the background on a computer will constantly 
check for virus attacks. Although various types of antivirus software work in 
different ways, they have some common features. They
» check software or files before they are run or loaded on a computer
» compare possible viruses against a database of known viruses
» carry out heuristic checking – this is the checking of software for types of 
behaviour that could indicate a possible virus, which is useful if software is 
infected by a virus not yet on the database
» put files or programs which may be infected into quarantine, to
– automatically delete the virus, or
– allow the user to decide whether to delete the file (it is possible that the 
user knows that the file or program is not infected by a virus – this is known 
as a false positive and is one of the drawbacks of antivirus software).
Antivirus software needs to be kept up to date since new viruses are constantly 
being discovered. Full system checks need to be carried out once a week, for 
example, since some viruses lie dormant and would only be picked up by this 
full system scan. 
Defragmentation software
As an HDD becomes full, blocks used for files will become scattered all over 
the disk surface (in potentially different sectors and tracks as well as different 
surfaces). This happens as files are deleted, partially-deleted, extended and 
so on. The consequence is slower data access time: the HDD read-write head 
requires several movements just to find and retrieve the data making up the 
required file. It would be advantageous if files could be stored in contiguous 
sectors, considerably reducing HDD head movements.
Note that, due to their different operation when accessing data, this is less of 
a problem with SSDs.
Consider the following example using a disk with 12 sectors per surface.
We have three files (1, 2 and 3) stored on track 8 of the disk surface.
sectors:
track 8:
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
File 1 File 2 File 3
▲ Figure	5.5
File 2 is deleted by the user and file 1 has data added to it. However, the file 2 
sectors which become vacant are not filled up straight away by new file 1 data 
since this would require ‘too much effort’ for the HDD resources.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   144 25/04/19   9:27 AM