179
7.1 Legal, moral, ethical and cultural implications
7
7.1 Legal, moral, ethical and cultural 
implications
Key terms
Legal – relating to, or permissible by, law.
Morality  – an understanding of the difference between 
right and wrong, often founded in personal beliefs.
Ethics – moral principles governing an individual’s or 
organisation’s behaviour, such as a code of conduct.
Culture – the attitudes, values and practices shared by 
a group of people/society.
Intellectual property rights – rules governing an 
individual’s ownership of their own creations or ideas, 
prohibiting the copying of, for example, software 
without the owner’s permission.
Privacy  – the right to keep personal information and 
data secret and for it to not be unwillingly accessed or 
shared through, for example, hacking.
Plagiarism  – the act of taking another person’s work 
and claiming it as one’s own.
BCS – British Computer Society.
IEEE – Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
ACM – Association for Computing Machinery.
The following definitions are important when considering ethical behaviour:
» Legal covers the law, whether or not an action is punishable by law.
» Morality concerns questions of right and wrong, and is more often thought 
of in relation to personal or individual choices.
» Ethics also concerns questions of right and wrong, but is more often used in 
a professional context.
» Culture refers to the attitudes, values and practices shared by a society or 
group of people.
Anything which breaks the law is termed illegal. Examples include copying 
software and then selling it without the permission of the copyright holders 
(see Section 7.2).
Morality is the human desire to distinguish between right and wrong. This varies 
from person to person, and between cultures (something that is considered 
immoral in one culture, may be acceptable practice in another, for example).
Immoral does not mean something is illegal (and vice versa). Creating a fake 
news website, for example, is not illegal, but it may be considered immoral if it 
causes distress to others. If the creator tried to obtain personal and financial 
data, then it would be become an illegal act.
Similarly, hacking is generally regarded as immoral, but not illegal. However, it 
becomes illegal if it compromises national security, or results in financial gain, 
or reveals personal information, for example.
In short, there is a fine line between an immoral act and an illegal act.
Unethical behaviour is the breaking of a code of conduct. For example, if 
somebody works for a software company and passes on some ideas to a rival 
company, this would be regarded as unethical behaviour. If the software is 
related to national security or is formally copyrighted, then it is also illegal.
It is essential to be clear whether any law has been broken.
The importance of culture is less tangible. When writing computer games, for 
example, programmers need to be careful that they do not include items which 
some cultures would find offensive or obscene. Again, this may not be unethical or 
illegal, but could still cause distress. It is important to realise that boundaries can 
easily be crossed; in some countries making fun of religion, for example, is illegal.
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   179 25/04/19   9:52 AM