37
2.1 Networking
2
Bus networks
A bus network topology uses a single central cable to which all computers and 
devices are connected. It is easy to expand and requires little cabling. Data can 
only travel in one direction; if data is being sent between devices then other 
devices cannot transmit. Terminators are needed at each end to prevent signal 
reflection (bounce). Bus networks are typically peer-to-peer. The disadvantages 
of a bus network include:
» If the main cable fails, the whole network goes down.
» The performance of the network deteriorates under heavy loading.
» The network is not secure since each packet passes through every node.
The advantages of a bus network include:
» Even if one node fails, the remainder of the network continues to function.
» It is easy to increase the size of the network by adding additional nodes.
▲	Figure	2.6 Bus network topology
In bus network topology, each node looks at each packet and determines 
whether or not the address of the recipient in the package matches the node 
address. If so, the node accepts the packet; if not, the packet is ignored.
These are most suitable for situations with a small number of devices with light 
traffic occurring. For example, a small company or an office environment.
Star networks
A star network topology uses a central hub/switch and each computer/device 
is connected to the hub/switch. Data going from host to host is directed 
through the central hub/switch. Each computer/device has its own dedicated 
connection to the central node (hub/switch) – any type of network cable can 
be used for the connections (see Section 2.1.5 Wired and wireless networking). 
This type of network is typically a client-server. The disadvantages of a star 
network include:
» The initial installation costs are high.
» If the central hub/switch fails, then the whole network goes down.
The advantages of a star network include:
» Data collisions are greatly reduced due to the topology.
» It is a more secure network since security methods can be applied to the 
central node and packets only travel to nodes with the correct address.
» It is easy to improve by simply installing an upgraded hub.
» If one of the connections is broken it only affects one of the nodes.
How packets are handled depends on whether the central node is a switch or 
a hub. If it is a hub, all the packets will be sent to every device/node on the 
star network – if the address in the packet matches that of the node, it will be 
accepted; otherwise, it is ignored (this is similar to the way packets are handled on 
a bus network). If the central node is a switch, packets will only be sent to nodes 
where the address matches the recipient address in the packet. The latter is clearly 
more secure, since only nodes intended to see the packet will receive it.
hub/switch
▲ Figure	2.7 Star network 
topology
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   37 4/30/19   7:45 AM