118 	 4	Processor	fundamentals
4
RTN can be abstract (generic notation – as shown on page 117) or concrete 
(specific to a particular machine – example shown below). For example, on a 
RISC computer:
instruction _ interpretation := (¬Run/Start →
Run ← 1; instruction _ interpretation):
Run → (CIR ← M[PC]:PC ← PC + 4; instruction _ execution)
Use of interrupts in the fetch-execute cycle
Section 4.1.7 gives a general overview of how a computer uses interrupts to 
allow a computer to operate efficiently and to allow it, for example, to carry 
out multi-tasking functions. Just before we discuss interrupts in this general 
fashion, the following notes explain how interrupts are specifically used in the 
fetch-execute cycle.
A special register called the interrupt register is used in the fetch-execute 
cycle. While the CPU is in the middle of carrying out this cycle, an interrupt 
could occur, which will cause one of the bits in the interrupt register to change 
its status. For example, the initial status might be 0000 0000 and a fault might 
occur while writing data to the hard drive; this would cause the register to 
change to 0000 1000. The following sequence now takes place.
» At the next fetch-execute cycle, the interrupt register is checked bit by bit.
» The contents 0000 1000 would indicate an interrupt occurred during a 
previous cycle and it still needs servicing. The CPU would now service this 
interrupt or ignore it for now, depending on its priority.
» Once the interrupt is serviced by the CPU, it stops its current task and stores 
the contents of its registers (see Section 4.1.7 for more details about how 
this is done).
» Control is now transferred to the interrupt handler (or interrupt service 
routine, ISR).
» Once the interrupt is fully serviced, the register is reset and the contents of 
registers are restored.
Figure 4.6 summarises the interrupt process during the fetch-execute cycle.
Yes
YesNo
fetch the
next
instructions
FETCH stage in the cycle EXECUTE stage in the cycle INTERRUPT stage in the cycle
END
interrupts
are
disabled
START execute interrupt
service routine (ISR)
suspend execution of
current program/task
interrupts enabled and
interrupt priority
checked
decode and
execute the
instruction
end of the
program?
No
any
interrupts?
▲ Figure 4.6 The interrupt process during the fetch-execute cycle
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   118 4/30/19   7:49 AM