190 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
» recognising a person’s face
» the ability to operate machinery, such as a car, an aeroplane or a train
» analysing data to predict the outcome of a future event, such as weather 
forecasting.
AI duplicates human tasks requiring decision-making and problem-solving skills.
7.3.2 The impact of AI
People often associate AI with science fiction, fantasy and robots. Numerous 
films and books fuel this association. The science fiction author, Isaac Asimov, 
went so far as to produce his own three laws of robotics:
1
 A robot may not injure a human through action or inaction.
2 A robot must obey orders given by humans without question.
3 A robot must protect itself unless it conflicts with the two laws above.
However, AI goes way beyond robotics. It covers an ever-increasing number of 
areas, such as
» autonomous (driverless) vehicles
» artificial limb technology
» drones, used to carry out dangerous or unpleasant tasks such as bomb 
disposal, welding, or entering nuclear disaster areas
» climate change predictions
» medical procedures, such as eye operations where extreme precision is 
required.
7.3.3 The impacts of AI on society, the economy and the 
environment
As a result of increasing automation over the next few decades, the human race 
will need to consider the impacts that AI will have on society, the economy 
and the environment. So should we all be worried? In this section, we will 
consider a number of existing AI technologies, plus some predictions for the 
future, to help stimulate discussions. As mentioned in Section 7.3.2, AI is not 
just about robots, but covers many areas (this is explored further in Chapter 18, 
which explores specific AI technologies in more depth).
We will look at some of the areas mentioned in Section 7.3.2 in more depth and 
consider the implications of using AI (the descriptions that follow will mix up 
benefits and drawbacks – in Activity 7C you will need to consider the overall 
impact).
▲ Figure 7.2 Examples of how AI can be used in every-day life
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   190 25/04/19   9:52 AM