151
5.2 Language translators
5
Compilers and interpreters
Programs written in a high-level language can be either translated into 
machine code by a compiler program, or directly executed line-by-line using an 
interpreter program.
Compilers usually store the translated program (object program) on a storage 
medium ready to be executed later. A loader program is needed to load the 
stored translated program into main memory before it can be executed. 
The stored translated program can be executed many times without being 
retranslated. The program will only need to be retranslated when changes are 
made to the source code.
With an interpreter, no translated program is generated in main memory or 
stored for later use. Every line in a program is interpreted then executed each 
time the program is run.
High-level language programs are machine independent, portable and can be 
run on any type of computer/chip, provided there is a compiler or interpreter 
available. For example, Java, Python and Visual Basic® (VB) are high-level 
languages often used for teaching programming.
The similarities and differences between assemblers, compilers and interpreters 
are shown in Table 5.3.
Assembler Compiler Interpreter
Source program written in assembly language high-level language high-level language
Machine dependent yes no no
Object program generated yes, stored on disk or in 
main memory
yes, stored on disk or in 
main memory
no, instructions are 
executed under the control 
of the interpreter
Each line of the source 
program generates
one machine code 
instruction, one to one 
translation
many machine code 
instructions, instruction 
explosion
many machine code 
instructions, instruction 
explosion
▲ Table	5.3 Similarities and differences between assemblers, compilers and interpreters 
5.2.2	 Pros and cons of compiling or interpreting a program
Both compilers and interpreters are used for programs written in high-level 
languages. Some integrated development environments (IDEs) have both 
available for programmers, since interpreters are most useful in the early stages 
of development and compilers produce a stand-alone program that can be 
executed many times without needing the compiler.
Table 5.4 shows the pros (in the blue cells) and cons (in the white cells) of 
compilers and interpreters.
Compiler Interpreter
The end user only needs the executable code, therefore, the 
end user benefits as there is no need to purchase a compiler 
to translate the program before it is used.
The end user will need to purchase a compiler or an 
interpreter to translate the source code before it is used.
The developer keeps hold of the source code, so it cannot 
be altered or extended by the end user, therefore, the 
developer benefits as they can charge for upgrades and 
alterations.
The developer relinquishes control of the source code, 
making it more difficult to charge for upgrades and 
alterations. Since end users can view the source code, they 
could potentially use the developer’s intellectual property.
EXTENSION	
ACTIVITY	5D
Find out about 
three more high-
level programming 
languages that are 
being used today.
➔
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   151 25/04/19   9:27 AM