69
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
3.1.1 Types of memory and storage
Computers require some form of memory and storage.
Memory is usually referred to as the internal devices which the computer can 
access directly. This memory can be the user’s workspace, temporary data or 
data that is key to running the computer.
Storage devices allow users to store applications, data and files. The user’s data 
is stored permanently and they can change it or read it as they wish. Storage 
needs to be larger than internal memory since the user may wish to store large 
files (such as music files or photographic images).
Storage devices can also be removable to allow data, for example, to be 
transferred between computers. Removable devices allow a user to store 
important data in a different building in case of data loss.
However, all of this has become a lot less important with the advent of 
technology such as ‘data drop’ (which uses Bluetooth) and cloud storage.
Internal memory includes components such as registers (which are part of the 
processor). There is also memory cache (which is external to the processor); 
this is used to store data which the processor will probably need to use again.
Programmable ROM (PROM) – type of ROM chip that 
can be programmed once.
Erasable PROM (EPROM) – type of ROM that can be 
programmed more than once using ultraviolet (UV) light.
Hard disk drive (HDD) – type of magnetic storage device 
that uses spinning disks.
Latency – the lag in a system; for example, the time to 
find a track on a hard disk, which depends on the time 
taken for the disk to rotate around to its read-write head.
Fragmented – storage of data in non-consecutive sectors; 
for example, due to editing and deletion of old data.
Removable hard disk drive – portable hard disk drive 
that is external to the computer; it can be connected 
via a USB part when required; often used as a device to 
back up files and data.
Solid state drive (SSD) – storage media with no moving 
parts that relies on movement of electrons.
Electronically erasable programmable read-only 
memory (EEPROM) – read-only (ROM) chip that can 
be modified by the user, which can then be erased and 
written to repeatedly using pulsed voltages.
Flash memory – a type of EEPROM, particularly suited 
to use in drives such as SSDs, memory cards and 
memory sticks.
Optical storage – CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray
TM discs that 
use laser light to read and write data.
Dual layering – used in DVDs; uses two recording layers.
Birefringence  – a reading problem with DVDs caused 
by refraction of laser light into two beams.
Binder 3D printing – 3D printing method that uses a 
two-stage pass; the first stage uses dry powder and the 
second stage uses a binding agent.
Direct 3D printing – 3D printing technique where print 
head moves in the x, y and z directions. Layers of melted 
material are built up using nozzles like an inkjet printer.
Digital to analogue converter (DAC) – needed to 
convert digital data into electric currents that can drive 
motors, actuators and relays, for example.
Analogue to digital converter (ADC) – needed to 
convert analogue data (read from sensors, for example) 
into a form understood by a computer.
Organic LED (OLED) – uses movement of electrons 
between cathode and anode to produce an on-screen 
image. It generates its own light so no back lighting 
required.
Screen resolution  – number of pixels in the horizontal 
and vertical directions on a television/computer screen.
Touch screen – screen on which the touch of a finger or 
stylus allows selection or manipulation of a screen image; 
they usually use capacitive or resistive technology.
Capacitive  – type of touch screen technology based 
on glass layers forming a capacitor, where fingers 
touching the screen cause a change in the electric field.
Resistive  – type of touch screen technology. When 
a finger touches the screen, the glass layer touches 
the plastic layer, completing the circuit and causing a 
current to flow at that point.
Virtual reality headset  – apparatus worn on the head 
that covers the eyes like a pair of goggles. It gives the 
user the ‘feeling of being there’ by immersing them 
totally in the virtual reality experience.
Sensor – input device that reads physical data from its 
surroundings.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   69 26/04/19   7:27 AM