30
2
	 2	CommuniCation
In recent years, another type of network – a metropolitan area network 
(MAN) – has emerged. MANs are larger than LANs as they can connect together 
many small computer networks (e.g LANs) housed in different buildings within 
a city (for example, a university campus). MANs are restricted in their size 
geographically to, for example, a single city. 
In contrast, WANs can cover a much larger geographical area, such as a country 
or  a continent. For example, a multi-national company may connect a number 
of smaller networks together (e.g. LANs or MANs) to form a world-wide WAN. 
This is covered in more detail later.
Here are some of the main benefits of networking computers and devices 
(rather than using a number of stand-alone computers):
» Devices, such as printers, can be shared (thus reducing costs).
» Licences to run software on networks are often far cheaper than buying 
licences for an equivalent number of stand-alone computers.
» Users can share files and data.
» Access to reliable data that comes from a central source, such as a file 
server.
» Data and files can be backed up centrally at the end of each day.
» Users can communicate using email and instant messaging.
» A network manager can oversee the network and, for example, apply access 
rights to certain files, or restrict access to external networks, such as the 
internet.
There are also a number of drawbacks:
» Cabling and servers can be an expensive initial outlay.
» Managing a large network can be a complex and difficult task.
» A breakdown of devices, such as the file servers, can affect the whole network.
» Malware and hacking can affect entire networks (particularly if a LAN is part 
of a much larger WAN), although firewalls do afford some protection in this 
respect.
Networked computers
Networked computers form an infrastructure which enables internal and external 
communications to take place. The infrastructure includes the following:
Hardware
» LAN cards
» routers
» switches
» wireless routers
» cabling
Software
» operation and management of the network
» operation of firewalls
» security applications/utilities
Services
» DSL
» satellite communication channels
» wireless protocols
» IP addressing.
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   30 4/30/19   7:45 AM