33
2.1 Networking
2
» The client-server model uses separate dedicated servers and specific 
client workstations; client computers will be connected to the server 
computer(s).
» Users are able to access most of the files, which are stored on dedicated 
servers.
» The server dictates which users are able to access which files. (Note: sharing 
of data is the most important part of the client-server model; with peer-to-
peer, connectivity is the most important aspect.)
» The client-server model allows the installation of software onto a client’s 
computer.
» The model uses central security databases which control access to the 
shared resources. (Note: passwords and user IDs are required to log into the 
network.)
» Once a user is logged into the system, they will have access to only those 
resources (such as a printer) and files assigned to them by the network 
administrator, so offers greater security than peer-to-peer networks.
» Client-server networks can be as large as you want them to be and they are 
much easier to scale up than peer-to-peer networks.
» A central server looks after the storing, delivery and sending of emails.
» This model offers the most stable system, for example, if someone deletes 
a shared resource from the server, the nightly back-up would restore the 
deleted resource (this is different in peer-to-peer – see later).
» Client-server networks can become bottlenecked if there are several client 
requests at the same time.
» In the client-server model, a file server is used and is responsible for
–
 central storage and management of data files, thus enabling other 
network users to access files
–
 allowing users to share information without the need for offline devices 
(such as a memory stick)
–
 allowing any computer to be configured as the host machine and act as 
the file server (note that the server could be a storage device (such as 
SSD or HDD) that could also serve as a remote storage device for other 
computers, thus allowing them to access this device as if it were a local 
storage device attached to their computer).
Examples of use of client-server network model
A company/user would choose a client-server network model for the following 
reasons.
» The company/user has a large user-base (however, it should be pointed out 
that this type of network model may still be used by a small group of people 
who are doing independent projects but need to have sharing of data and 
access to data outside the group).
» Access to network resources needs to be properly controlled.
» There is a need for good network security.
» The company requires its data to be free from accidental loss (in other 
words, data needs to be backed up at a central location).
An example is the company Amazon; it uses the client-server network 
model. The user front-end is updated every time a user logs on to the 
Amazon website and a large server architecture handles items such as order 
processing, billing customers and data security; none of the Amazon users are 
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   33 4/30/19   7:45 AM