44
2
	 2	CommuniCation
Twisted pair cables
Twisted pair cables are the most common cable type used in LANs. However, 
of the three types of cable, it has the lowest data transfer rate and suffers 
the most from external interference (such as electromagnetic radiation). 
However, it is the cheapest option. There are two types of twisted pair cable: 
unshielded and shielded. Unshielded is used by residential users. Shielded is 
used commercially (the cable contains a thin metal foil jacket which cancels 
out some of the external interference).
Coaxial cables
Coaxial cables are the most commonly used cables in MANs and by cable 
television companies. The cost of coaxial cables is higher than twisted pair 
cables but they offer a better data transfer rate and are affected less by 
external interference. Coaxial cables also have about 80 times the transmission 
capacity of twisted pair. Coaxial suffers from the greatest signal attenuation, 
but offers the best anti-jamming capabilities.
Fibre optic cables
Fibre optic cables are most commonly used to send data over long distances, 
because they offer the best data transfer rate, the smallest signal attenuation 
and have a very high resistance to external interference. The main drawback is 
the high cost. Unlike the other two types of cable, fibre optics use pulses of 
light rather than pulses of electricity to transmit data. They have about 26
 000 
times the transmission capacity of twisted pair cables.
Fibre optic cables can be single- or multi-mode.
Single-mode uses a single mode light source and has a smaller central 
core, which results in less light reflection along the cable. This allows the 
data to travel faster and further, making them a good choice for CATV and 
telecommunications.
Multi core allows for a multi-mode light source; the construction causes higher 
light reflections in the core, so they work best over shorter distances (in a LAN, 
for example).
Wired versus wireless
Numerous factors should be considered when deciding if a network should use 
wired or wireless connectivity, as listed below.
pairs
conductor
insulator
cable jacket
1
2
3
4 copper mesh copper wire
outside insulation insulation
optical fibres
flexible buffer
tube
water blocking
binders
ripcord
jacket
Aramid strength
yarns
▲	Figure	2.12 (left to right) Twisted pair cable, coaxial cable, fibre optic cable
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   44 4/30/19   7:45 AM