115
4.1 Central processing unit (CPU) architecture
4
The USB system has become the industry standard, but there are still pros and 
cons to using this system, as summarised in Table 4.2.
Pros of USB system Cons of USB system
n devices plugged into the computer 
are automatically detected and device 
drivers are automatically loaded up
n the connectors can only fit one way, 
which prevents incorrect connections 
being made
n this has become the industry standard, 
which means that considerable support 
is available to users
n several different data transmission rates 
are supported
n newer USB standards are backward 
compatible with older USB standards
n the present transmission rate is limited 
to less than 500 megabits per second
n the maximum cable length is presently 
about five metres
n the older USB standard (such as 1.1) 
may not be supported in the near future▲ Table	4.2 Pros and cons of the USB system
High-definition multimedia interface (HDMI)
High-definition multimedia interface (HDMI) ports allow output (both audio 
and visual) from a computer to an HDMI-enabled device. They support high-
definition signals (enhanced or standard). HDMI was introduced as a digital 
replacement for the older Video Graphics Array (VGA) analogue system. 
Modern HD (high definition) televisions have the following features, which are 
making VGA a redundant technology:
» They use a widescreen format (16:9 aspect ratio).
» The screens use a greater number of pixels (typically 1920 × 1080).
» The screens have a faster refresh rate (such as 120 Hz or 120 frames a 
second).
» The range of colours is extremely large (some companies claim up to four 
million different colour variations).
This means that modern HD televisions require more data, which has to be 
received at a much faster rate than with older televisions (around 10 gigabits 
per second). HDMI increases the bandwidth, making it possible to supply the 
necessary data for high quality sound and visual effects.
HDMI can also afford some protection against piracy since it uses  
high-bandwidth digital copy protection (HDCP). HDCP uses a type of 
authentication protocol (see Chapters 6 and 17). For example, a Blu-ray player 
will check the authentication key of the device it is sending data to (such as an 
HD television). If the key can be authenticated, then handshaking takes place 
and the Blu-ray can start to transmit data to the connected device.
Video Graphics Array (VGA)
VGA was introduced at the end of the 1980s. VGA supports 640 × 480 pixel 
resolution on a television or monitor screen. It can also handle a refresh rate 
of up to 60
 Hz (60 frames a second) provided there are only 16 different colours 
being used. If the pixel density is reduced to 200 × 320, then it can support up 
to 256 colours.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   115 25/04/19   9:07 AM