22
1
1 InformatIon representatIon and multImedIa 
MP3 files are used in MP3 players, computers or mobile phones. Music files 
can be downloaded or streamed from the internet in a compressed format, or 
CD files can be converted to MP3 format. While streamed or MP3 music quality 
can never match the ‘full’ version found on a CD, the quality is satisfactory for 
most purposes.
But how can the original music file be reduced by 90% while still retaining 
most of the music quality? This is done using file compression algorithms that 
use perceptual music shaping.
Perceptual music shaping removes certain sounds. For example
» frequencies that are outside the human hearing range
» if two sounds are played at the same time, only the louder one can be heard 
by the ear, so the softer sound is eliminated.
This means that certain parts of the music can be removed without affecting 
the quality too much. MP3 files use what is known as a lossy format, since part 
of the original file is lost following the compression algorithm. This means that 
the original file cannot be put back together again. However, even the quality 
of MP3 files can be different, since it depends on the bit rate – this refers 
to the number of bits per second used when creating the file. Bit rates are 
between 80 and 320 kilobits per second; usually 200 kilobits or higher gives a 
sound quality close to a normal CD.
MPEG-4 (MP4) files are slightly different to MP3 files. This format allows the 
storage of multimedia files rather than just sound. Music, videos, photos and 
animation can all be stored in the MP4 format. Videos, for example, could 
be streamed over the internet using the MP4 format without losing any real 
discernible quality (see Chapter 2 for notes on video streaming).
Photographic (bit-map) images
When a photographic file is compressed, both the file size and quality of image 
are reduced. A common file format for images is JPEG, which uses lossy file 
compression. Once the image is subjected to the JPEG compression algorithm, 
a new file is formed and the original file can no longer be constructed. A JPEG 
will reduce the raw bit-map image by a factor of between 5 and 15, depending 
on the quality of the original.
Vector graphics can also undergo some form of file compression. Scalable 
vector graphics (.svg) are defined in XML text files which, therefore, allows 
them to be compressed.
Run-length encoding (RLE)
Run-length encoding (RLE) can be used to compress a number of different file 
formats.
It is a form of lossless/reversible file compression that reduces the size of a 
string of adjacent, identical data (such as repeated colours in an image).
A repeating string is encoded into two values.
The first value represents the number of identical data items (such as 
characters) in the run. The second value represents the code of the data item 
(such as ASCII code if it is a keyboard character).
RLE is only effective where there is a long run of repeated units/bits.
EXTENSION 
ACTIVITY 1D
Find out how file 
compression can 
be applied to a 
photograph without 
noticeably reducing 
its quality. Compare 
this to run-length 
encoding (RLE), 
described below.
457591_01_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_001-026.indd   22 25/04/19   9:11 AM