150 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Integrated 	development	environment 	(IDE) – a suite of 
programs used to write and test a computer program 
written in a high-level programming language.
Syntax	error	– an error in the grammar of a source 
program.
Logic
	error	– an error in the logic of a program.
Debugging – the process of finding logic errors in a 
computer program by running or tracing the program.
Single	stepping – the practice of running a program 
one line/instruction at a time.
Breakpoint  – a deliberate pause in the execution 
of a program during testing so that the contents of 
variables, registers, and so on can be inspected to aid 
debugging.
Report
	window – a separate window in the run-time 
environment of the IDE that shows the contents of 
variables during the execution of a program.
5.2 .1	 Translation and execution of programs
Instructions in a program can only be executed when written in machine code 
and loaded into the main memory of a computer. Programming instructions 
written in any programming language other than machine code must be 
translated before they can be used. The systems software used to translate 
a source program written in any language other than machine code are 
translators. There are three types of translator available, each translator 
performs a different role.
Assemblers
Programs written in assembly language are translated into machine code by 
an assembler program. Assemblers either store the program directly in main 
memory, ready for execution, as it is translated, or they store the translated 
program on a storage medium to be used later. If stored for later use, then 
a loader program is also needed to load the stored translated program into 
main memory before it can be executed. The stored translated program can be 
executed many times without being re-translated.
Every different type of computer/chip has its own machine code and assembly 
language. For example, MASM is an assembler that is used for the X86 family 
of chips, while PIC and GENIE are used for microcontrollers. Assembly language 
programs are machine dependent; they are not portable from one type of 
computer/chip to another.
Here is a short sample PIC assembly program:
  movlw B’00000000’
  tris PORTB
  movlw B’00000011’
  movwf PORTB
 stop: goto stop
Assembly language programs are often written for tasks that need to be 
speedily executed, for example, parts of an operating system, central heating 
system or controlling a robot.
EXTENSION	
ACTIVITY	5C
Find out what 
task this very 
short sample PIC 
assembly program 
is performing.
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   150 25/04/19   9:27 AM