88 3 Hardware
3
 b) Secondary storage can be magnetic, optical or solid state. 
  Describe two features of each type of storage which differentiates it 
from the other two types.
2 a) Explain the main differences in operation of a laser printer compared 
with an inkjet printer.
 b) i)  Name one application of a laser printer and one  application of an 
inkjet printer.
 ii) For each of your named applications in part b) i), give a reason why 
the chosen printer is the most suitable.
3
 An art gallery took several photographs of a valuable, fragile painting. 
The images were sent to a computer where they were processed by a 3D 
printing application. A 3D printout of the painting was produced showing 
the texture of the oil paint, canvas and any flaws in the painting.
 Give reasons why the art gallery would wish to make this 3D replica.
4 The following diagram shows a schematic of a microprocessor-controlled 
street lighting system.
 
sensor
ADC
DAC
street
light
microprocessor
 The microprocessor is used to control the operation of the street lamp. 
The lamp is fitted with a light sensor which constantly sends data to the 
microprocessor. The data value from the sensor changes according to 
whether it is sunny, cloudy, raining, night time, and so on.
 Describe how the microprocessor would be used to automatically switch 
on the light at night and switch it off again when it becomes light. Include 
a feature to stop the light constantly flickering on and off when it becomes 
overcast or cars go past with full headlights at night.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3E
1 Look at this simplified diagram of a keyboard; 
the letter H has been pressed. Explain:
a)
 how pressing the letter H has been 
recognised by the computer
b) how the computer manages the very slow 
process of inputting data from a keyboard.
2
 a) Describe how these types of pointing devices 
work.
i)
 Mechanical mouse
ii) Optical mouse
b) Connectivity between mouse and computer 
can be through USB cable or wireless. 
Explain these two types of connectivity.
conductive layers
H
J letter H has been pressed and
now makes contact with bottom
conductive layer
letter H
interpreted
by computerinsulating layer
G
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   88 26/04/19   7:27 AM