152 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Compiler Interpreter
Compiled programs take a shorter time to execute as 
translation has already been completed and the machine 
code generated may have been optimised by the compiler. 
An interpreted program can take longer to execute than 
the same program when compiled, since each line of the 
source code needs to be translated before it is executed 
every time the program is run.
Compiled programs have no syntax or semantic errors. Interpreted programs may still contain syntax or semantic 
errors if any part of the program has not been fully tested, 
these errors will need to be debugged.
The source program can be translated on one type of 
computer then executed on another type of computer.
Interpreted programs cannot be interpreted on one type 
of computer and run on another type of computer.
A compiler finds all errors in a program. One error detected 
can mean that the compiler finds other dependent errors 
later on in the program that will not be errors when the 
first error is corrected. Therefore, the number of errors 
found may be more than the actual number of errors.
It is easier to develop and debug a program using an 
interpreter as errors can be corrected on each line and 
the program restarted from that place, enabling the 
programmer to easily learn from any errors.
Untested programs with errors may cause the computer to 
crash.
Untested programs should not be able to cause the 
computer to crash.
The developer needs to write special routines in order to 
view partial results during development, making it more 
difficult to assess the quality of particular sections of 
code.
Partial results can be viewed during development, 
enabling the developer to make informed decisions about 
a section of code, for example whether to continue, 
modify, or scrap and start again.
End users do not have access to the source code and 
the run-time libraries, meaning they are unable to 
make modifications and are reliant on the developer for 
updates and alterations.
If an interpreted program is purchased, end users have all the 
source code and the run-time libraries, enabling the program 
to be modified as required without further purchase.
▲ Table	5.4 Pros (blue cells) and cons (white cells) of compilers and interpreters.
5.2.3	 Partial compiling and interpreting
In order to achieve shorter execution times, many high-level languages 
programs use a system that is partially compilation and partially interpretation. 
The source code is checked and translated by a compiler into object code. 
The compiled object code is a low-level machine independent code, called 
intermediate code, p-code or bytecode. To execute the program, the object 
code can be interpreted by an interpreter or compiled using a compiler. 
For example, Java and Python programs can be translated by a compiler into a 
set of instructions for a virtual machine. These instructions, called bytecode, 
are then interpreted by an interpreter. 
Below are examples of Java and Python intermediate code (bytecode):
Source code:
public class HelloWorld 
{
  public static void main(String[] args) 
  {
    System.out.println("Hello World");
  }
}
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   152 25/04/19   9:27 AM