82 3 Hardware
3
Figure 3.17 shows a simplified form of how OLED technology works.
▲ Figure 3.17 Simplified form of how OLED technology works
OLEDs use organic materials (made up of carbon compounds) to create flexible 
semiconductors. Organic films are sandwiched between two charged electrodes 
(one is a metallic cathode and the other a glass anode). When an electric field 
is applied to the electrodes, they give off light. This means that no form of 
back lighting is required. This allows for very thin screens. It also means that 
there is no longer a need to use LCD technology, since OLED is a self-contained 
system.
Screen displays are based on the pixel (the smallest picture element) concept 
where each screen pixel is made up of three sub-pixels, which are red, green 
and blue. By varying the intensity of the three sub-pixels, it is possible to 
generate millions of colours. The greater the number of pixels on a screen, 
the greater is the screen resolution (the number of pixels which can be 
viewed horizontally and vertically on screen; for example, 1680 × 1080 
pixels). LCD and OLED screens use this type of pixel matrix to make up the 
picture.
The ‘purple’ pixel is made up of a combination of
three sub-pixels, which are red, green and blue, in the
required intensity, to ‘fool’ the eye into seeing a
purple dot on the screen. The whole screen is filled
with thousands of these tiny pixels.
▲ Figure 3.18 The pixel matrix
Touch screens (which act as both input and output devices) also make use 
of LCD and OLED technology. They are particularly used in mobile phones and 
tablets.
We shall now consider LCD capacitive and resistive touch screen technologies.
Capacitive
» Made up of many layers of glass that act like a capacitor creating electric 
fields between the glass plates in layers.
» When the top glass layer is touched, the electric current changes and the 
coordinates where the screen was touched are determined by an on board 
microprocessor.
Benefits
» Medium cost technology.
» Screen visibility is good even in strong sunlight.
» Permits multi-touch capability.
» Screen is very durable; it takes a major impact to break the glass.
negative charges
positive charges
glass or plastic top layer
metallic cathode (negative charge)
emissive layer
conductive layer
glass anode (positive charge)
glass or plastic bottom layer
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   82 26/04/19   7:27 AM