209
8.2 Database management systems (DBMSs)
8
Developer interface – feature of a 
DBMS that provides developers with 
the commands required for definition, 
creation and manipulation of a database.
Structured query language (SQL) – the 
standard query language used with 
relational databases for data definition 
and data modification.
Query processor – feature of a DBMS 
that processes and executes queries 
written in structured query language 
(SQL).
8.2 .1 How a DBMS addresses the limitations of a  
file-based approach
Data redundancy issue
This is solved by storing data in separate linked tables, which reduces the 
duplication of data as most items of data are only stored once. Items of data 
used to link tables by the use of foreign keys are stored more than once. The 
DBMS will flag any possible errors when any attempt is made to accidentally 
delete this type of item.
Data inconsistency issue
This is also solved by storing most items of data only once, allowing updated 
items to be seen by all applications. As data is not inconsistent, the integrity 
of the data stored is improved. Consistent data is easier to maintain as an item 
of data will only be changed once, not multiple times, by different applications.
Data dependency issue
Data is independent of the applications using the database, so changes made 
to the structure of the data will be managed by the DBMS and have little or no 
effect on the applications using the database. Any fields or tables added to 
or removed from the database will not affect the applications that do not use 
those fields/tables, as each application only has access to the fields/tables it 
requires.
Information from a database is more easily available in a form that is required 
so it is not dependent on the structure of the data and the application used. A 
DBMS usually includes facilities to query the data stored using a defined query 
language or a query-by-example facility.
The DBMS approach
A DBMS uses a more structured approach to the management, organisation and 
maintenance of data in a database. An already-defined data structure can be 
used to set up and create the database. The entry of new data, the storage of 
data, the alteration and deletion of data are all managed by the DBMS.
A DBMS uses a data dictionary to store the metadata, including the definition 
of tables, attributes, relationships between tables and any indexing. The 
data dictionary can also define the validation rules used for the entry of data 
and contain data about the physical storage of the data. The use of a data 
dictionary improves the integrity of the data stored, helping to ensure that it is 
accurate, complete and consistent.
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   209 25/04/19   10:01 AM