143
5.1 Operating systems
5
5.1.3	 Utility software
Computer users are provided with a number of utility programs that are part of 
the operating system. However, users can also install their own utility software 
in addition. This software is usually initiated by the user, but some, such as 
virus checkers, can be set up to constantly run in the background. Utility 
software offered by most operating systems includes
» hard disk formatter
» virus checker
» defragmentation software
» disk contents analysis/repair software
» file compression
» back-up software.
Hard disk formatter
A new hard disk drive needs to be initialised ready for formatting. The 
operating system needs to know how to store files and where the files will 
be stored on the hard disks. A disk formatter will organise storage space by 
assigning it to data blocks (partitions). A disk surface may have a number of 
partitions (see Chapter 3 for more details regarding the organisation of data on 
hard disks). Note that partitions are contiguous blocks of data.
Once the partitions have been created, they must be formatted. This is usually 
done by writing files which will hold directory data and tables of contents 
(TOC) at the beginning of each partition. This allows the operating system 
to recognise a file and know where to find it on the disk surface. Different 
operating systems will use different filing systems; Windows, for example, uses 
new technology filing system (NTFS).
When carrying out full formatting using NTFS, all disk sectors are filled with 
zeros; these zeros are read back, thus testing the sector, but any data already 
stored there will be lost. So, it is important to remember that reformatting 
an HDD which has already been used will result in loss of data during the 
formatting procedure.
Disk formatters also have checking tools, which are non-destructive tests that 
can be carried out on each sector. If any bad sector errors are discovered, the 
sectors will be flagged as ‘bad’ and the file tracking records will be reorganised – 
this is done by replacing the bad sectors with new unused sectors, effectively 
repairing the faulty disk. A damaged file will now contain an ‘empty’ sector, 
which allows the file to be read but it will be corrupted since the bad sector will 
have contained important (and now lost) data. It would, therefore, be prudent to 
delete the damaged file leaving the rest of the HDD effectively repaired.
Bad sectors can be categorised as hard or soft. There are a number of ways that 
they can be produced, as shown in Table 5.1.
Hard bad sectors (difficult to repair) Soft bad sectors
n caused by manufacturing errors
n damage to disk surface caused by allowing the read-
write head to touch the disk surface (for example, by 
moving HDD without first parking the read-write head)
n system crash which could lead to damage to the disk 
surface(s)
n sudden loss of power leading to data corruption in 
some of the sectors 
n effect of static electricity leading to corruption of 
data in some of the sectors on the hard disk surfaces
▲ Table	5.1 Hard and soft bad sectors
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   143 25/04/19   9:27 AM