27
	2 	 Communication
In this chapter, you will learn about
★ the benefits of networking devices
★ the characteristics of a local area network (LAN) and a wide area 
network (WAN)
★ client-server and peer-to-peer models in networking
★ the differences between thin client and thick client
★ bus, star, mesh and hybrid networking topologies
★ public and private cloud computing
★ the differences between wired and wireless networks  
(including types of cable and wireless technologies)
★ the hardware required to support a LAN
★ the function of routers
★ Ethernet and how data collisions are detected and avoided
★ bit streaming (including differences between real-time and  
on-demand streaming of data)
★ the differences between the internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)
★ the hardware needed to support the internet
★ IP addresses (including IPv4, IPv6, public IP addresses and private IP 
addresses)
★ the use of the uniform resource locator (URL) to locate a resource on 
the world wide web
★ the role of the domain name service (DNS).
WHAT	YOU	SHOULD	ALREADY	KNOW
Try these three questions before you read this 
chapter.
1	 a)
 Explain the following terms associated 
with devices connected to a network/
internet.
i)
 MAC address
ii) IP address
b) Explain the main differences between a 
MAC address and an IP address and why it 
is necessary to have both associated with a 
device connected to the internet.
c)
 What is the purpose of an internet service 
provider (ISP)?
d) Explain the function of an internet browser. 
In what ways is this different to an ISP?
2
 A college is about to form a network from 
20 stand-alone computers. Describe the 
hardware and software that might be needed 
to produce this simple computer network.
3	 a)
 Mobile phones and tablets can be 
configured to access the internet from any 
location. Describe the software required to 
allow this to happen.
b)
 Describe some of the benefits and 
drawbacks (when compared to a desktop 
PC) of accessing website pages from a 
mobile phone.
2.1 Networking
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   27 4/30/19   7:45 AM