48
2
	 2	CommuniCation
ROUTER
computer
server
computer
computer
SWITCH
LAN
LAN or WAN
internet
▲	Figure	2.16	Router flow diagram
Broadband routers sit behind a firewall. The firewall protects the computers 
on a network. The router’s main function is to transmit internet and 
transmission protocols between two networks and allow private networks to 
be connected.
The router inspects the data package sent to it from any computer on any 
of the networks connected to it. Since every computer on the same network 
has the same part of an internet protocol (IP) address, the router is able to 
send the data packet to the appropriate switch and it will then be delivered 
using the MAC destination address (see next section). If the MAC address 
doesn’t match any device on the network, it passes on to another switch on 
the same network until the appropriate device is found. Routers can be wired 
or wireless devices.
Gateway
A gateway is a network point (or node) that acts as an entrance to another 
network. It is a key point for data on its way to or from other networks. It 
can be used to connect two or more dissimilar LANs (LANs using different 
protocols). The gateway converts data packets from one protocol to another. 
Gateways can also act as routers, firewalls or servers – in other words, any 
device that allows traffic to flow in and out of the networks. Gateways can be 
wired or wireless devices.
All networks have boundaries so that all communication within the network is 
conducted using devices such as switches or routers. If a network node needs 
to communicate outside its network, it needs to use a gateway.
Modems
Modern computers work with digital data, whereas many of the public 
communication channels still only allow analogue data transmission. To allow 
the transmission of digital data over analogue communication channels we 
need to use a modem (modulator demodulator). This device converts digital 
data to analogue data. It also does the reverse and converts data received 
over the analogue network into digital data which can be understood by the 
computer.
Wireless modems transmit data in a modulated form to allow several 
simultaneous wireless communications to take place without interfering 
with each other. A modem will connect to the public infrastructure (cable, 
telephone, fibre-optics or satellite) and will supply the user with a standard 
Ethernet output which allows connection to a router, thus enabling an internet 
connection to occur.
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   48 4/30/19   7:45 AM