211
8.3 Data definition language (DDL) and data manipulation language (DML)
8
8.3 Data definition language (DDL) and 
data manipulation language (DML)
WHAT YOU SHOULD ALREADY KNOW
Try this exercise before you read 
the third part of this chapter.
Using a DBMS with a graphical user 
interface (GUI), create the student 
database used in Section 8.1.5.
Write the following queries using a 
query-by-example form.
1
 A list of all the teachers and 
their subjects.
2
 A list of the pupils in class 7A 
in alphabetical order of second 
name.
3
 A list of the students studying 
each subject.
You may want to save this database 
to practise your SQL commands.
Key terms
Data definition language (DDL) – a 
language used to create, modify and 
remove the data structures that form a 
database.
Data manipulation language (DML) – a 
language used to add, modify, delete and 
retrieve the data stored in a relational 
database.
SQL script – a list of SQL commands that 
perform a given task, often stored in a 
file for reuse.
8.3.1 Industry standard methods for building and 
modifying a database
DBMSs use a data definition language (DDL) to create, modify and remove the 
data structures that form a relational database. DDL statements are written as 
a script that uses syntax similar to a computer program.
DBMSs use a data manipulation language (DML) to add, modify, delete and 
retrieve the data stored in a relational database. DML statements are written in 
a script that is similar to a computer program.
These languages have different functions: DDL is used for working on the 
relational database structure, whereas DML is used to work with the data stored 
in the relational database.
Most DBMSs use structured query language (SQL) for both data definition and 
data manipulation. SQL was developed in the 1970s and since then it has been 
adopted as an industry standard.  
8.3.2 SQL (DDL) commands and scripts
In order to be able to understand and write SQL, you should have practical 
experience of writing SQL scripts . There are many applications that allow you 
to do this. For example, MySQL and SQLite are freely available ones. When using 
any SQL application it is important that you check the commands available to 
use as these may differ slightly from those listed below.
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   211 25/04/19   10:01 AM