28
2
	 2	CommuniCation
Key	terms
ARPAnet – Advanced Research Projects Agency Network.
WAN – wide area network (network covering a very 
large geographical area).
LAN – local area network (network covering a small 
area such as a single building).
MAN – metropolitan area network (network which 
is larger than a LAN but smaller than a WAN, which 
can cover several buildings in a single city, such as a 
university campus).
File
	server – a server on a network where central files 
and other data are stored. They can be accessed by a 
user logged onto the network.
Hub – hardware used to connect together a number 
of devices to form a LAN that directs incoming data 
packets to all devices on the network (LAN).
Switch – hardware used to connect together a number 
of devices to form a LAN that directs incoming data 
packets to a specific destination address only.
Router – device which enables data packets to be 
routed between different networks (for example, can 
join LANs to form a WAN).
Modem – modulator demodulator. A device that 
converts digital data to analogue data (to be sent down 
a telephone wire); conversely it also converts analogue 
data to digital data (which a computer can process).
WLAN  – wireless LAN.
(W)AP  – (wireless) access point which allows a device 
to access a LAN without a wired connection.
PAN – network that is centred around a person or their 
workspace.
Client-server  – network that uses separate dedicated 
servers and specific client workstations. All client 
computers are connected to the dedicated servers.
Spread
	spectrum 	technology – wideband radio 
frequency with a range of 30 to 50 metres.
Node – device connected to a network (it can be a 
computer, storage device or peripheral device).
Peer-to-peer – network in which each node can share 
its files with all the other nodes. Each node has its own 
data and there is no central server.
Thin
	client – device that needs access to the internet for 
it to work and depends on a more powerful computer 
for processing.
Thick	client – device which can work both off line and 
on line and is able to do some processing even if not 
connected to a network/internet.
Bus	network 	topology	– network using single central 
cable in which all devices are connected to this cable so 
data can only travel in one direction and only one device 
is allowed to transmit at a time.
Packet – message/data sent over a network from node to 
node (packets include the address of the node sending the 
packet, the address of the packet recipient and the actual 
data – this is covered in greater depth in Chapter 14).
Star
	network 	topology – a network that uses a central 
hub/switch with all devices connected to this central 
hub/switch so all data packets are directed through this 
central hub/switch.
Mesh
	network 	topology – interlinked computers/
devices, which use routing logic so data packets are 
sent from sending stations to receiving stations only by 
the shortest route.
Hybrid
	network – network made up of a combination of 
other network topologies.
Cloud
	storage – method of data storage where data is 
stored on off-site servers.
Data	redundancy – situation in which the same data is 
stored on several servers in case of maintenance or repair.
Wi-Fi – wireless connectivity that uses radio waves, 
microwaves. Implements IEEE 802.11 protocols.
Bluetooth – wireless connectivity that uses radio waves 
in the 2.45
 GHz frequency band.
Spread	spectrum 	frequency 	hopping – a method of 
transmitting radio signals in which a device picks one of 
79 channels at random. If the chosen channel is already 
in use, it randomly chooses another channel. It has a 
range up to 100 metres.
WPAN – wireless personal area network. A local wireless 
network which connects together devices in very close 
proximity (such as in a user’s house); typical devices 
would be a laptop, smartphone, tablet and printer.
Twisted
	pair	cable – type of cable in which two wires 
of a single circuit are twisted together. Several twisted 
pairs make up a single cable.
Coaxial 	cable – cable made up of central copper core, 
insulation, copper mesh and outer insulation.
Fibre	optic	cable	– cable made up of glass fibre wires 
which use pulses of light (rather than electricity) to 
transmit data.
Gateway – device that connects LANs which use 
different protocols.
Repeater – device used to boost a signal on both wired 
and wireless networks.
Repeating
	hubs – network devices which are a hybrid of 
hub and repeater unit.
Bridge – device that connects LANs which use the 
same protocols.
Softmodem  – abbreviation for software modem; a 
software-based modem that uses minimal hardware.
NIC – network interface card. These cards allow 
devices to connect to a network/internet (usually 
associated with a MAC address set at the factory).
2 .1	 Networking
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   28 4/30/19   7:45 AM