89
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3
3.2 .1	 Logic gates
Electronic circuits in computers, many memories and controlling devices are 
made up of thousands of logic gates. Logic gates take binary inputs and 
produce a binary output. Several logic gates combined together form a logic 
circuit and these circuits are designed to carry out a specific function. The 
checking of the output from a logic gate or logic circuit can be done using a 
truth table.
This section will consider the function and role of logic gates, logic circuits 
and truth tables. A number of possible applications of logic circuits will also 
be considered. A reference to Boolean algebra will be made throughout this 
section, although this is covered in more depth in Chapter 15.
Six different logic gates will be considered in this section.
NOT gate AND gate OR gate
XOR gateNOR gateNAND gate
▲ Figure	3.22 Six typ es of logic gate
EXTENSION	ACTIVITY	3F
Another new screen technology is known as quantum 	LED	(QLED), which is 
i
n direct competition with organic 	(LED
). Look at this statement:
‘QLED televisions are simply LED televisions that use quantum dots to 
enhance their overall performance in key picture quality areas.’
Find out the main differences between QLED and OLED technologies.
3.2	 Logic gates and logic circuits
Key	terms
Logic	gates	– electronic circuits which rely on  
‘on/
off’ logic. The most common ones are NOT, AND, 
OR, NAND, NOR and XOR.
Logic	cir
cuit	– for
med from a combination of logic gates 
and designed to carry out a particular task. The output 
from a logic circuit will be 0 or 1.
Truth	tab le – a method of checking the output from 
a logic circuit. They use all the possible binary input 
combinations depending on the number of inputs; 
for example, two inputs have 2
2 (4) possible binary 
combinations, three inputs will have 2 3 (8) possible 
binary combinations, and so on.
Boolean	algeb
ra – a form of algebra linked to logic 
circuits and based on TRUE and FALSE.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   89 02/05/19   12:35 PM