165
6.1 Data security
6
They need an active host program on the target computer or an operating 
system that has already been infected before they can run.
Worms
A type of stand-alone virus that can replicate themselves with the intention of 
spreading to other computers; they often use networks to search out computers 
with weak security.
Logic bombs
Code embedded in a program on a computer. When certain conditions are met 
(such as a specific date) they are activated to carry out tasks such as deleting 
files or sending data to a hacker.
Trojan horses
Malicious programs often disguised as legitimate software. They replace all or 
part of the legitimate software with the intent of carrying out some harm to 
the user’s computer system.
Bots (internet robots)
Not always harmful and can be used, for example, to search automatically for 
an item on the internet. However, they can cause harm by taking control over a 
computer system and launching attacks.
Spyware
Software that gathers information by monitoring, for example, key presses on 
the user’s keyboard. The information is then sent back to the person who sent 
the software – sometimes referred to as key logging software.
Phishing
Phishing is when someone sends legitimate-looking emails to users. They 
may contain links or attachments which, when clicked, take the user to a fake 
website, or they may trick the user into responding with personal data such as 
bank account details or credit card numbers. The email often appears to come 
from a trusted source such as a bank or service provider. The key is that the 
recipient has to carry out a task (click a link, for example) before the phishing 
scam causes harm.
There are numerous ways to help prevent phishing attacks:
» Users need to be aware of new phishing scams. Those people in industry or 
commerce should undergo frequent security awareness training to become 
aware of how to identify phishing (and pharming) scams.
» Do not click on links unless certain that it is safe to do so; fake emails 
can often be identified by greetings such as ‘Dear Customer’ or ‘Dear 
emailperson@gmail.com’, and so on.
» It is important to run anti-phishing toolbars on web browsers (this includes 
tablets and mobile phones) since these will alert the user to malicious 
websites contained in an email.
» Look out for https and/or the green padlock symbol in the address bar (both 
suggest that traffic to and from the website is encrypted).
» Regularly check online accounts and frequently change passwords.
» Ensure an up-to-date browser, with all of the latest security upgrades,  
is running, and run a good firewall in the background at all times. A 
combination of a desktop firewall (usually software) and a network firewall 
(usually hardware) considerably reduces risk.
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   165 25/04/19   9:35 AM