180 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
7.1.1 Computer ethics
Computer ethics is a set of principles set out to regulate the use of computers. 
Three factors are considered:
» Intellectual property rights , for example, copying of software without the 
permission of the owner.
» Privacy issues, for example, hacking or any illegal access to another person’s 
personal data.
» Effect of computers on society, for example, job losses, social impacts, and 
so on.
Internet use has led to an increase in plagiarism – this is when a person takes 
another person’s idea or work and claims it was their own. While it is fine to 
quote another person’s idea, it is essential that some acknowledgement is made 
so that the originator of the idea or work is known to others. This can be done 
by a series of references at the end of a document or footnotes on each page 
where a reference needs to be made. Software exists that can scan text and 
then look for examples of plagiarism by searching web pages on the internet.
7.1.2 Professional ethical bodies
There are a number of professional bodies representing individuals working in 
the fields of computing and information technology that have developed their 
own codes of conduct, to which members are expected to adhere. Belonging to 
one of these organisations demonstrates your professional integrity by showing 
that you are committed to upholding the standards they prescribe.
The British Computer Society (BCS)
The British Computer Society (BCS) is a professional body set up in the 
UK, initially to represent the rights and ethical practices of all professionals 
working in the IT and computing industries. It is now an international body 
which works in close partnership with other groups to monitor and advise IT 
practices across the globe.
The BCS Code of Conduct (www.bcs.org/category/6030) covers four main 
areas:
1 The Public Interest
2 Professional Competence and Integrity
3 Duty to Relevant Authority
4 Duty to the Profession
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) was set up in the 
USA with the aims of
» raising awareness of ethical issues
» promoting ethical behaviour among professionals working in the electronics 
industry
» ensuring engineers and scientists respect the need for ethical behaviour.
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   180 25/04/19   9:52 AM