50
2
	 2	CommuniCation
Wireless network interface card/controller (WNIC)
Wireless network interface cards/controllers (WNICs) are the same as the 
more ordinary NICs, in that they are used to connect devices to the internet 
or other networks. They use an antenna to communicate with networks via 
microwaves and normally simply plug into a USB port or can be internal 
integrated circuit plug in.
As with usual NICs, they work on layers 1 and 2 of the OSI model (refer to 
Chapter 14 for more details). WNICs work in two modes.
Infrastructure mode requires WAPs (wireless access points) and all the data 
is transferred using the WAP and hub/switch; all the wireless devices connect 
to the WAP and must use the same security and authentication techniques.
Ad hoc mode does not need to have access to WAPs; it is possible for devices 
to interface with each other directly.
2 .1.7	 Ethernet
Ethernet is a protocol used by many wired LANs. It was adopted as a standard 
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) and Ethernet is 
also known as IEEE 802.3. A network using Ethernet is made up of:
» a node (any device on the LAN)
» medium (path used by the LAN devices, such as an Ethernet cable)
» frame (data is transmitted in frames which are made up of source address 
and destination address – the addresses are often the MAC address).
Conflicts
When using Ethernet, it is possible for IP addresses to conflict; this could show 
up as a warning such as that in Figure 2.19.
▲	Figure	2.19 IP address conflict error
This may occur if devices on the same network have been given the same 
IP address; without a unique IP address it is not possible to connect to a 
network. This is most likely to occur on a LAN where dynamic IP addresses 
may have been used. Dynamic IP addresses are temporary and may have been 
assigned to a device on the network, unfortunately, another device using 
static IP addresses may already have the same IP address. This can be resolved 
by re-starting the router. Any dynamic IP addresses will be re-assigned, which 
could resolve the issue.
Collisions
Ethernet supports broadcast transmission (communications where pieces of 
data are sent from sender to receiver) and are used to send messages to all 
devices connected to a LAN. The risk is that two messages using the same data 
▲	Figure	2.18 Wireless 
network interface  
card/controller (WNIC)
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   50 4/30/19   7:45 AM