35
2.1 Networking
2
Peer-to-peer offers little data security since there is no central security system. 
This means it is impossible to know who is authorised to share certain data. 
Users can create their own network node share point which is the only real 
security aspect since this gives them some kind of control. However, there are 
no real authentication procedures.
Examples of peer-to-peer network model
A user would choose the peer-to-peer network model for one or more of 
following reasons:
» The network of users is fairly small.
» There is no need for robust security.
» They require workstation-based applications rather than being server-based.
An example would be a small business where there is frequent user 
interaction and there is no need to have the features of a client-server 
network (for example, a builder with five associated workers located in their 
own homes who only need access to each other’s diaries, previous jobs,  
skills-base and so on – when the builder is commissioned to do a job they 
need to access each other’s computer to check on who is available and who 
has the appropriate skills).
Thin clients and thick clients
The client-server model offers thin clients and thick clients. These can often 
refer to both hardware and software.
Thin client
A thin client is heavily dependent on having access to a server to allow 
constant access to files and to allow applications to run uninterrupted. A 
thin client can either be a device or software which needs to be connected 
to a powerful computer or server to allow processing to take place (the 
computer or server could be on the internet or could be part of a LAN/MAN/
WAN network). The thin client will not work unless it is connected at all 
times to the computer or server. A software example would be a web browser 
which has very limited functions unless it is connected to a server. Other 
examples include mobile phone apps which need constant access to a server 
to work. A hardware example is a POS terminal at a supermarket that needs 
constant access to a server to find prices, charge customers and to do any 
significant processing. 
Thick client
A thick client can either be a device or software that can work offline or 
online; it is still able to do some processing whether it is connected to a server 
or not. A thick client can either be connected to a LAN/MAN/WAN, virtual 
network, the internet or a cloud computing server. A hardware example is a 
normal PC/laptop/tablet since it would have its own storage (HDD or SSD), 
RAM and operating system which means it is capable of operating effectively 
online or offline. An example of software is a computer game which can run 
independently on a user’s computer, but can also connect to an online server to 
allow gamers to play and communicate with each other.
Table 2.1 highlights some of the pros and cons of using thick client or thin 
client hardware.
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   35 4/30/19   7:45 AM