105
3.2 Logic gates and logic circuits
3
4 The nine stages in printing a page using an inkjet printer are shown below.  
They are not in the correct order.
 Write the letters A to I so that the stages are in the correct order.  [9]
A The data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory 
known as a printer buffer.
B As the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves 
from side to side across the paper printing the text or image. The four ink 
colours are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final 
colour.
C The data from the document is sent to a printer driver.
D Once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the 
processor in the computer, which is a request for more data to be sent to the 
printer. The whole process continues until the whole of the document has 
been printed.
E The printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer 
can understand.
F At the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very 
slightly to allow the next line to be printed. This continues until the whole 
page has been printed.
G A check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is 
available to print (is it busy? is it off line? is it out of ink? and so on).
H If there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage 
5 is repeated until the buffer is finally empty.
I A sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer, where a sensor 
detects whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of 
paper (or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to  
the computer.
5 a) There are two types of RAM: dynamic RAM (DRAM) and static RAM 
(SRAM). Five statements about DRAM and RAM are shown below. Copy 
the diagram below and connect each statement to the appropriate type of 
RAM.
 [5]
Statement Type of RAM
requires the data to be refreshed periodically in 
order to retain data
has more complex circuitry DRAM
does not need to be refreshed as the circuit holds 
the data as long as the power supply is on
requires higher power consumption which is 
significant when used in battery-powered devices SRAM
used predominantly in cache memory of 
processors where speed is important
b) Give three differences between RAM and ROM.  [3]
➔
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   105 26/04/19   7:27 AM