164 6 Security, privacy and data integrity
6
Fingerprint scans
Images of fingerprints are compared against previously scanned fingerprints 
stored in a database; if they match then access is allowed; the system  
compares patterns of ‘ridges’ and ‘valleys’ which are fairly unique (accuracy 
is about 1 in 500).
Retina scans
Retina scans use infra-red to scan the unique pattern of blood vessels in the retina 
(at the back of the eye). It requires a person to stay still for 10 to 15 seconds 
while the scan takes place; it is very secure since nobody has yet found a way to 
duplicate the blood vessels patterns’ (accuracy is about 1 in 10 million).
▲ Figure	6.4 Retina scan
Mobile phones use biometrics to identify if the phone user is the owner.
6.1.3	 Risks to the security of stored data
Hacking
You will see the term hacking used throughout this textbook. There are two 
types of hacking: malicious and ethical.
Malicious hacking is the illegal access to a computer system without the user’s 
permission or knowledge. It is usually employed with the intention of deleting, 
altering or corrupting files, or to gain personal details such as bank account 
details. Strong passwords, firewalls and software which can detect illegal 
activity all guard against hacking.
Ethical hacking is authorised by companies to check their security measures 
and how robust their computer systems are to resist hacking attacks. It is 
legal, and is done with a company’s permission with a fee paid to the ethical 
hacker.
Malware
Malware is one of the biggest risks to the integrity and security of data on a 
computer system. Many software applications sold as antivirus are capable of 
identifying and removing most of the forms of malware described below.
Viruses
Programs or program code that can replicate and/or copy themselves with the 
intention of deleting or corrupting files or causing the computer to malfunction. 
▲ Figure	6.3 Fingerprint
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   164 25/04/19   9:35 AM