125
4.2 Assembly language
4
Unconditional and conditional instructions
Instruction Explanation
Opcode Operand
JMP <address> Jump to the specified address
JPE <address> Following a compare instruction, jump to the specified 
address if the comparison is True
JPN <address> Following a compare instruction, jump to the specified 
address if the comparison is False
END Returns control to the operating system
Jump means change the PC to the address specified, so the next instruction to be 
executed is the one stored at the specified address, not the one stored at the next 
location in memory
▲ Table	4.7 Unconditional and conditional instructions
Compare instructions
Instruction Explanation
Opcode Operand
CMP <address> Compare the contents of ACC with the contents of the 
specified address (direct or absolute addressing is used)
CMP #n Compare the contents of ACC with the number n
CMI <address> The address to be used is the contents of the specified 
address; compare the contents of the contents of the given 
address with ACC (indirect addressing is used)
The contents of the accumulator are always compared
▲ Table	4.8 Compare instructions
4.2.4	 Addressing modes
Assembly language and machine code programs use different addressing modes 
depending on the requirements of the program.
Absolute addressing – the contents of the memory location in the operand 
are used. For example, if the memory location with address 200 contained the 
value 20, the assembly language instruction LDD 200 would store 20 in the 
accumulator.
Direct addressing – the contents of the memory location in the operand are 
used. For example, if the memory location with address 200 contained the 
value 20, the assembly language instruction LDD 200 would store 20 in the 
accumulator. Absolute and direct addressing are the same.
Indirect addressing – the contents of the contents of the memory location in 
the operand are used. For example, if the memory location with address 200 
contained the value 20 and the memory location with address 20 contained 
the value 5, the assembly language instruction LDI 200 would store 5 in the 
accumulator.
Indexed addressing – the contents of the memory location found by adding 
the contents of the index register (IR) to the address of the memory location 
in the operand are used. For example, if IR contained the value 4 and memory 
location with address 204 contained the value 17, the assembly language 
instruction LDX 200 would store 17 in the accumulator.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   125 25/04/19   9:07 AM