166 6 Security, privacy and data integrity
6
» Be wary of pop-ups – use the web browser to block them; if pop-ups get 
through your defences, do not click on ‘cancel’ since this often leads to 
phishing or pharming sites – the best option is to select the small X in the 
top right hand corner of the pop-up window, which closes it down.
Pharming
Pharming is malicious code installed on a user’s computer or on a web 
server. The code re-directs the user to a fake website without their 
knowledge (the user does not have to take any action, unlike phishing). The 
creator of the malicious code can gain personal data such as bank details 
from users. Often, the website appears to belong to a trusted company and 
can lead to fraud or identity theft.
Why does pharming pose a threat to data security?
Pharming redirects users to a fake or malicious website set up by, for example, 
a hacker. Redirection from a legitimate website can be done using DNS cache 
poisoning.
Every time a user types in a URL, their web browser contacts the DNS 
server. The IP address of the website is then sent back to their web 
browser. However, DNS cache poisoning changes the real IP address values 
to those of the fake website consequently, the user’s computer connects to 
the fake website.
Pharmers can also send malicious programming code to a user’s computer. The 
code is stored on the HDD without their knowledge. Whenever the user types in 
the website address of the targeted website, the malicious programming code 
alters the IP address sent back to their browser which redirects it to the fake 
website.
Protection against pharming
It is possible to mitigate the risk of pharming by
» using antivirus software, which can detect unauthorised alterations to a 
website address and warn the user
» using modern web browsers that alert users to pharming and phishing 
attacks
» checking the spelling of websites
» checking for https and/or the green padlock symbol in the address bar.
It is more difficult to mitigate risk if the DNS server itself has been infected 
(rather than the user’s computer).
EXTENSION	ACTIVITY	6C
Pharmers alter IP addresses in order to send users to fake websites. 
However, the internet does not only have one DNS server. Find out how a 
user’s internet service provider (ISP) uses its own DNS servers which cache 
information from other internet DNS servers.
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   166 25/04/19   9:35 AM