191
7.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
7
New developments in AI are constantly being announced and you are advised  
to keep up to date by checking out the many websites that keep an eye on  
AI development.
Below are some of the developments and impacts that are currently expected to 
be seen in the near future.
Research has predicted that, by 2030, some 600 million jobs will be lost 
globally and as many as 400 million people will need to retrain or switch jobs –  
all caused by the inevitable advances in AI. The most likely jobs to be lost 
are those doing medium- and low-skilled work, but high-skilled jobs (such as 
hospital technicians, architects, engineers) are also at risk. This could lead to 
civil unrest with large numbers of young people out of work, with few or no 
employment prospects, unless they have a sought-after skill.
History has shown, however, that previous technological advances all ended up 
creating a net increase in jobs. As automation takes over, jobs on the factory 
floor are lost, but production becomes much faster and more efficient, thus 
requiring an increase in the number people doing tasks that the automation 
process cannot yet do, such as quality control, test driving new vehicles and 
so on. Technology creates new jobs which are generally more interesting 
to humans than the manual jobs which are lost. However, history does not 
always repeat itself, so we need to prepare ourselves for a large reduction in 
employment and think about how to redistribute wealth so that the overall 
impact of AI will be positive.
It is predicted that, eventually, 99% of all jobs could be eliminated since the 
increase in the use of AI is exponential – competition between countries 
and companies to expand their economies will continue to fuel this growth. 
One question that might be legitimately asked is, ‘if 99% of jobs disappear, 
who will build the robots and maintain them?’ To answer that question, 
let us consider a present-day solution to the question. 3D printers are 
actually now being designed and made by other 3D printers with no human 
interaction – the whole process is automatic with AI algorithms in control of 
the building, design and maintenance of these printers. So, it seems logical 
that other robots/machines will build and maintain future robots and other 
AI systems.
An increase in AI will leave people with more time to pursue their hobbies 
and have a better lifestyle. Previous industrial revolutions have led to steep 
changes in the economies of countries that embrace the new technology. 
Being left behind is not an economic option but is it a good environmental 
option?
Improvements in AI technology can have a positive impact on the 
environment. Scientists now have more information than ever about 
what affects the environment. AI can help by finding patterns and 
interconnections within the thousands of data sets. This helps scientists 
make informed predictions about the environment and potential climate 
change. Since this analysis is very complex, the use of AI systems can speed 
up this process incredibly and allow the human race to take action much 
faster than they could by present methods. Here are some potential ways in 
which AI can help:
» AI can help us to conserve natural resources (for example, improve the 
conservation of water supplies).
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   191 25/04/19   9:52 AM