112 	 4	Processor	fundamentals
4
4 .1. 4	 System buses
control bus
address bus
data bus
system bus
CPU memory input/output
ports
▲ Figure	4.2	System buses
(System) buses are used in computers as a parallel transmission component; 
each wire in the bus transmits one bit of data. There are three common buses 
used in the Von Neumann architecture known as address bus, data bus and 
control bus.
Address bus
As the name suggests, the address bus carries addresses throughout 
the computer system. Between the CPU and memory the address bus is 
unidirectional (in other words, bits can travel in one direction only). This 
prevents addresses being carried back to the CPU, which would be undesirable.
The width of a bus is important. The wider the bus, the more memory locations 
which can be directly addressed at any given time; for example, a bus of width 
16
 bits can address 216 (65 536) memory locations, whereas a bus width of 
32 bits allows 4 294 967 296 memory locations to be simultaneously addressed. 
Even this is not large enough for modern computers, but the technology behind 
even wider buses is outside the scope of this book.
Data bus
The data bus is bidirectional (in other words, it allows data to be sent in both 
directions along the bus). This means data can be carried from CPU to memory 
(and vice versa) as well as to and from input/output devices. It is important 
to point out that data can be an address, an instruction or a numerical value. 
As with the address bus, the width of the data bus is important: the wider the 
bus, the larger the word length that can be transported. (A word is a group of 
bits which can be regarded as a single unit, for example, 16-bit, 32-bit or  
64-bit word lengths are the most common). Larger word lengths can improve 
the computer’s overall performance.
Control bus
The control bus is also bidirectional. It carries signals from the CU to all the 
other computer components. It is usually 8-bits wide since it only carries 
control signals.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   112 25/04/19   9:07 AM