197
8.1 Database concepts
8
8.1.1 The limitations of a file-based approach
A file is a collection of items of data. It can be structured as a collection of 
records, where each record is made up of fields containing data about the same 
‘thing’. Individual elements of data can be called data items.
When a program is used for data processing, the organisation of any records 
used depends on how the program is written. Records can be fixed or variable 
in length and each record may also contain information about its structure, for 
example, the number of fields or the length of the record. If these records are 
to be processed by another program, that program must be written to use the 
exact same record structure. If the structure is changed by one program, the 
other program must be rewritten as well. This can cause problems if updating 
programs is not carefully managed.
For example, a business keeps separate payroll files and sales files. Each file is 
used by a different application.
Field – a column in a table in a database.
Tuple – one instance of an entity, which 
is represented by a row in a table.
Entity – anything that can have data 
stored about it, for example, a person, 
place, event, thing.
Attribute (database)  – an individual data 
item stored for an entity, for example, for 
a person, attributes could include name, 
address, date of birth.
Candidate key – an attribute or smallest 
set of attributes in a table where no tuple 
has the same value.
Primary key – a unique identifier for a 
table. It is a special case of a candidate 
key.
Secondary key  – a candidate key that is 
an alternative to the primary key.
Foreign key – a set of attributes in one 
table that refer to the primary key in 
another table.
Relationship  – situation in which one 
table in a database has a foreign key that 
refers to a primary key in another table 
in the database.
Referential integrity  – property of a 
database that does not contain any 
values of a foreign key that are not 
matched to the corresponding primary 
key.
Index (database)  – a data structure 
built from one or more columns in a 
database table to speed up searching 
for data.
Entity-relationship (E-R) model or E-R 
diagram – a graphical representation 
of a database and the relationships 
between the entities.
Normalisation (database)  – the 
process of organising data to be 
stored in a database into two or more 
tables and
 relationships between the 
tables,  so that data redundancy is 
minimised. 
First normal form (1NF) – the status of 
a relational database in which entities 
do not contain repeated groups of 
attributes.
Second normal form (2NF) – the 
status of a relational database in which 
entities are in 1NF and any non-key 
attributes depend upon the primary  
key.
Third normal form (3NF) – the status of 
a relational database in which entities 
are in 2NF and all non-key attributes are 
independent.
Composite key – a set of attributes that 
form a primary key to provide a unique 
identifier for a table.
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   197 25/04/19   10:01 AM