viii
Introduction
This textbook provides the knowledge, understanding and practical skills 
to support those studying Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer 
Science. This textbook is part of a suite of resources which include a 
Programming Skills Workbook and an Online Teacher’s Guide.
The syllabus content has been covered comprehensively and is presented in two 
sections: Chapters 1 to 12 cover the AS Level, Chapters 13 to 20 cover the extra 
content required for the full A Level. 
How to use this book
To make your study of Computer Science as rewarding and successful as possible, 
this textbook, endorsed by Cambridge Assessment International Education, offers 
the following important features.
Organisation
The content is presented in the same order as in the syllabus, and the chapter 
titles match those in the syllabus.
Features to help you learn
Each chapter is broken down into several sections, so that the content is 
accessible. 
At the start of each chapter, there is a blue box that gives a summary of the 
syllabus points to be covered in that chapter, to show you what you are going 
to learn.
In this chapter, you will learn about
★ binary magnitudes, binary prefixes and 
decimal prefixes
★ binary, denary and hexadecimal number 
systems
★ how to carry out binary addition and 
subtraction
★ the use of hexadecimal and binary coded 
decimal (BCD) number systems
★ the representation of character sets (such as 
ASCII and Unicode)
★ how data for a bit-mapped image is encoded
★ how to estimate the file size for a bit-map image
★ image resolution and colour depth
★ encoding of vector graphics
★ the representation of sound in a computer
★ the effects of changing sampling rate and 
resolution on sound quality
★ the need for file compression methods (such 
as lossy and lossless formats)
★ how to compress common file formats 
(such as text files, bit-map images, vector 
graphics, sound files and video files).
The grey-blue What you should already know boxes at the beginning of each 
chapter or section help you to check you have the right level of knowledge 
before you begin. You may have already studied Computer Science at IGCSE,  
O Level or equivalent, or you may not have. These boxes contain questions to 
find out how much you remember, or to gauge your previous learning. If you are 
unable to answer the questions, you will need to refresh your memory, or make 
sure you are familiar with the the relevant ideas, before continuing.
IntRoDUCtIon
457591_FM_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_i-xiv.indd   8 4/30/19   7:42 AM