77
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
3.1.2 Input and output devices
This section will consider laser printers, inkjet printers, 3D printers, speakers, 
microphones, screens and sensors.
Laser printers
Laser printers use dry powder ink rather than liquid ink and make use of the 
properties of static electricity to produce the text and images. Unlike inkjet 
printers, for example, laser printers print the whole page in one go. Colour laser 
printers use four toner cartridges – blue, cyan, magenta and black. Although 
the actual technology is different to monochrome printers, the printing method 
is similar, but colour dots are used to build up the text and images.
When a user wishes to print a document using a laser printer, the following 
sequence of events takes place.
Stage Description of what happens
1 data from the document is sent to a printer driver
2 printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer 
can understand
3 check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is 
available to print (is it busy? is it off-line? is it out of ink? and so on)
4 data is sent to the printer and stored in a temporary memory known as a 
printer buffer
5 printing drum given a positive charge. As this drum rotates, a laser beam 
scans across it removing the positive charge in certain areas, leaving 
negatively charged areas which exactly match the text/images of the page 
to be printed
6 drum is coated with positively charged toner (powdered ink). Since the toner is 
positively charged, it only sticks to the negatively charged parts of the drum
7 negatively charged sheet of paper is rolled over the drum
8 toner on the drum sticks to the paper to produce an exact copy of the page 
sent to the printer
9 to prevent the paper sticking to the drum, the electric charge on the paper 
is removed after one rotation of the drum
10 the paper goes through a fuser (a set of heated rollers), where the heat 
melts the ink so that it fixes permanently to the paper
11 a discharge lamp removes all the electric charge from the drum so it is 
ready to print the next page
▲ Table 3.5 Sequence to print using a laser printer
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3D
A recent development is PRAM (parameter RAM) or PCRAM (phase-change 
RAM) which utilises chalogenide glass. This is glass containing elements 
such as sulphur, antimony, selenium, germanium or tellurium. Chalogenide 
compounds used in PRAMs/PCRAMs can be changed between the 
amorphous (glass-like) state and crystalline state, which changes the optical 
and electrical properties allowing the storage of data when used as a film on 
the surface of optical media.
Find out more about this technology and determine whether this could result 
in the demise of the current solid state removable devices.
▲ Figure 3.9 A laser printer
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   77 26/04/19   7:27 AM