162 6 Security, privacy and data integrity
6
Example of a strong password: Sy12@#TT90kj=0
Example of a weak password: GREEN
Digital signatures
Digital signatures protect data by providing a way of identifying the sender of, 
for example, an email. These are covered in more depth in Chapter 17.
Use of firewalls
A firewall can be software or hardware. It sits between the user’s computer and 
an external network (such as the internet) and filters information in and out 
of the computer. This allows the user to decide to allow communication with 
an external source and warns a user that an external source is trying to access 
their computer. Firewalls are the primary defence to any computer system to 
protect from hacking, malware (viruses and spyware), phishing and pharming.
▲ Figure	6.2 Firewall
user’s computer firewall (software 
or hardware) internet
The tasks carried out by a firewall include
» examining the traffic between the user’s computer (or internal network) and 
a public network (such as the internet)
» checking whether incoming or outgoing data meets a given set of criteria
» blocking the traffic if the data fails to meet the criteria, and giving the user 
(or network manager) a warning that there may be a security issue
» logging all incoming and outgoing traffic to allow later interrogation by the 
user (or network manager)
» preventing access to certain undesirable sites – the firewall can keep a list 
of all undesirable IP addresses
» helping to prevent viruses or hackers entering the user’s computer (or 
internal network)
» warning the user if some software on their system is trying to access an 
external data source (such as an automatic software upgrade). The user is given 
the option of allowing it to go ahead or request that such access is denied.
The firewall can be a hardware interface which is located somewhere between 
the computer (or internal network external link) and the internet connection. In 
EXTENSION	ACTIVITY	6B
Which of the following are weak passwords and which are strong 
passwords?
Explain your decision in each case.
a) 25-May-2000
b) Pas5word
c) ChapTer@06
d) AbC*N55!
e) 12345X
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   162 25/04/19   9:35 AM