108 	 4	Processor	fundamentals
4
Key	terms
Von	Neumann	architecture  – computer architecture 
which introduced the concept of the stored program in 
the 1940s.
Arithmetic 	logic	unit	(ALU) – component in the 
processor which carries out all arithmetic and logical 
operations.
Control	unit – ensures synchronisation of data flow 
and programs throughout the computer by sending out 
control signals along the control bus.
System	clock – produces timing signals on the control 
bus to ensure synchronisation takes place.
Immediate
	access	store	(IAS) – holds all data and 
programs needed to be accessed by the control unit.
Accumulator  – temporary general purpose register 
which stores numerical values at any part of a given 
operation.
Register – temporary component in the processor 
which can be general or specific in its use that holds 
data or instructions as part of the fetch-execute cycle.
Status
	register – used when an instruction requires 
some form of arithmetic or logical processing.
Flag – indicates the status of a bit in the status register, 
for example, N = 1 indicates the result of an addition 
gives a negative value.
Address
	bus – carries the addresses throughout the 
computer system.
Data
	bus	– allows data to be carried from processor to 
memory (and vice versa) or to and from input/output 
devices.
Control	bus – carries signals from control unit to all 
other computer components.
Unidirectional  – used to describe a bus in which bits 
can travel in one direction only.
Bidirectional  – used to describe a bus in which bits can 
travel in both directions.
Word – group of bits used by a computer to represent a 
single unit.
Clock
	cycle – clock speeds are measured in terms of 
GHz; this is the vibrational frequency of the clock which 
sends out pulses along the control bus – a 3.5  GHZ clock 
cycle means 3.5 billion clock cycles a second.
Overclocking  – changing the clock speed of a system 
clock to a value higher than the factory/recommended 
setting.
BIOS – basic input/output system.
Cache	memory – a high speed auxiliary memory which 
permits high speed data transfer and retrieval.
Core – a unit made up of ALU, control unit and registers 
which is part of a CPU. A CPU may contain a number of 
cores.
Dual	core – a CPU containing two cores.
Quad	core – a CPU containing four cores.
Port – external connection to a computer which allows 
it to communicate with various peripheral devices. A 
number of different port technologies exist.
Universal 	Serial	Bus	(USB) – a type of port connecting 
devices to a computer.
Asynchronous
	serial	data	transmission  – serial refers 
to a single wire being used to transmit bits of data one 
after the other. Asynchronous refers to a sender using 
its own clock/timer device rather sharing the same 
clock/timer with the recipient device.
High-definition
	multimedia	interface 	(HDMI) – type of 
port connecting devices to a computer.
Video
	Graphics 	Array	(VGA) – type of port connecting 
devices to a computer.
High-bandwidth
	digital	copy	protection 	(HDCP) – part 
of HDMI technology which reduces risk of piracy of 
software and multimedia.
Fetch-execute 	cycle – a cycle in which instructions and 
data are fetched from memory and then decoded and 
finally executed.
Program	counter	(PC) – a register used in a computer 
to store the address of the instruction which is 
currently being executed.
Current	instruction 	register – a register used to 
contain the instruction which is currently being 
executed or decoded.
Register	Transfer	Notation	(RTN) – short hand 
notation to show movement of data and instructions in 
a processor, can be used to represent the operation of 
the fetch-execute cycle.
Interrupt  – signal sent from a device or software to 
a processor requesting its attention; the processor 
suspends all operations until the interrupt has been 
serviced.
Interrupt
	priority  – all interrupts are given a priority 
so that the processor knows which need to be serviced 
first and which interrupts are to be dealt with quickly.
Interrupt 	service 	routine	(ISR)	or	interrupt 	handler – 
software which handles interrupt requests (such as 
‘printer out of paper’) and sends the request to the CPU 
for processing.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   108 25/04/19   9:07 AM