110 	 4	Processor	fundamentals
4
The accumulator (ACC) is a temporary register used when carrying out ALU 
calculations.
Control unit (CU)
The CU reads an instruction from memory (the address of the location where the 
instruction can be found is stored in the program counter (PC)). This instruction 
is then interpreted. During that process, signals are generated along the control 
bus to tell the other components in the computer what to do. The CU ensures 
synchronisation of data flow and program instructions throughout the computer. 
System clock
A system clock is used to produce timing signals on the control bus to ensure 
this vital synchronisation takes place – without the clock the computer would 
simply crash. (See Section 4.1.4 System buses.)
Immediate access store (IAS)
The IAS holds all the data and programs that the processor (CPU) needs to 
access. The CPU takes data and programs held in backing store and puts them 
into the IAS temporarily. This is done because read/write operations carried out 
using the IAS are considerably faster than read/write operations to backing store. 
Consequently, any key data needed by an application will be stored temporarily in 
IAS to speed up operations. The IAS is another name for primary (RAM) memory.
4 .1.3	 Registers
One of the most fundamental components of the Von Neumann system is the 
register. Registers can be general purpose or special purpose. General purpose 
registers hold data that is frequently used by the CPU or can be used by the 
programmer when addressing the CPU directly. The accumulator is a good 
example of a general purpose register and will be used as such throughout this 
book. Special purpose registers have a specific function within the CPU and 
hold the program state.  
The most common special registers referred to in this book are shown in  
Table 4.1. The use of many of these registers is explained more fully in 
Section 4.1.6 (fetch-execute cycle) and in Section 4.2 (tracing of assembly 
code programs).
Register Abbreviation Function/purpose of register
current instruction 
register
CIR stores the current instruction being decoded and 
executed
index register IX used when carrying out index addressing 
operations (assembly code)
memory address 
register
MAR stores the address of the memory location 
currently being read from or written to 
memory data/
buffer register
MDR/MBR stores data which has just been read from memory 
or data which is about to be written to memory 
(sometimes referred to as MBR)
program counter PC stores the address where the next instruction to be 
read can be found
status register SR contain bits which can be set or cleared depending 
on the operation (for example, to indicate overflow 
in a calculation)
▲ Table	4.1 Common registers
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   110 25/04/19   9:07 AM