189
7.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
7
software. For example, the license must not insist that all other programs 
distributed on the same medium must be open-source software.
10 License Must Be Technology-Neutral No provision of the license may be 
predicated on any individual technology or style of interface.
Freeware
Freeware is software a user can download from the internet free of charge. 
Once it has been downloaded, there are no fees associated with using the 
software (examples include: Adobe Reader, Skype and some media players). 
Unlike free software, freeware is subject to copyright laws and users are often 
requested to tick a box to say they understand and agree to the terms and 
conditions governing the software. This means that a user is not allowed to 
study or modify the source code in any way.
Shareware
Shareware allows users to try out some software free of charge for a trial period. 
At the end of the trial period, the author of the software will request that 
you pay a fee if you wish to continue using it. Once the fee is paid, a user is 
registered with the originator of the software and free updates and help are then 
provided. Often, the trial version of the software is missing some of the features 
found in the full version, and these do not become available until the fee is paid.
This type of software is protected by copyright laws and users must not use the 
source code in any of their own software without permission.
ACTIVITY 7B
1 a) What is meant by the term software piracy ? 
b) Describe three ways of protecting software against deliberate 
attempts at making copies to sell or give away.
2 A software company offers a suite of shareware programs. It contains a 
spreadsheet, word processor, database and drawing package.
 What are the benefits to the following two stakeholders of offering 
software packages as shareware?
n The company
n The customer
7.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
Key term
Artificial intelligence (AI)  – machine or application which carries out a task that 
requires some degree of intelligence when carried out by a human counterpart.
7.3.1 What is AI?
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a machine or application which carries out a 
task that requires some degree of intelligence when carried out by a human 
being. These tasks could include
» the use of a language
» carrying out a mathematical calculation or function
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   189 25/04/19   9:52 AM