55
2.2 The internet 
2
World Wide Web (WWW)
» This is a collection of multimedia web pages and other documents which are 
stored on websites.
» http(s) protocols are written using HyperText Mark-up Language (HTML).
» Uniform resource locators (URLs) specify the location of all web pages.
» Web resources are accessed by web browsers.
» The world wide web uses the internet to access information from servers and 
other computers.
2.2.2	 Hardware and software needed to support  
the internet
The fundamental requirements for connecting to the internet are
» a device (such as a computer, tablet or mobile phone)
» a telephone line connection or a mobile phone network connection 
(however, it is possible that a tablet or mobile phone may connect to the 
internet using a wireless router)
» a router (which can be wired or wireless) or router and modem
» an internet service provider (ISP) (combination of hardware and software)
» a web browser.
The telephone network system, public switched telephone network (PSTN), 
is used to connect computers/devices and LANs between towns and cities. 
Satellite technology is used to connect to other countries (see later).
In recent years, telephone lines have changed from copper cables to fibre optic 
cables, which permits greater bandwidth and faster data transfer rates (and 
less risk of data corruption from interference). Fibre optic telephone networks 
are usually identified as ‘fast broadband’. As discussed earlier, high speed 
broadband has allowed WLANs to be developed by using WAPs.
High speed communication links allow telephone and video calls to be made 
using a computer and the internet. Telephone calls require either an internet-
enabled telephone connected to a computer (using a USB port) or external/
internal microphone and speakers. Video calls also require a webcam. When 
using the internet to make a phone call, the user’s voice is converted to 
digital packages using Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). Data is split into 
packages (packet switching) and sent over the network via the fastest route. 
Packet switching and circuit switching are covered in more detail in Chapter 14.
Comparison between PSTN and internet when making a phone call
Public switched telephone network (PSTN)
PSTN uses a standard telephone connected to a telephone line.
The telephone line connection is always open whether or not anybody is talking – 
the link is not terminated until the receivers are replaced by both parties.
Telephone lines remain active even during a power cut; they have their own 
power source.
Modern phones are digitised systems and use fibre optic cables (although 
because of the way it works this is a big waste of capacity – a 10 minute phone 
call will transmit about 10
 MB of data).
Existing phone lines use circuit switching (when a phone call is made the 
connection (circuit) is maintained throughout the duration of the call – this is 
the basis of PSTN).
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   55 4/30/19   7:45 AM