210 8 Databases
8
Data modelling is an important tool used to show the data structure of a 
database. An E-R diagram is an example of a data model. A logical schema is 
a data model for a specific database that is independent of the DBMS used to 
build the database. 
A DBMS helps to provide data security to prevent the unwanted alteration, 
corruption, deletion or sharing of data with others that have no right to  
access it.
Security measures taken by a DBMS can include
» using usernames and passwords to prevent unauthorised access to the 
database 
» using access rights to manage the actions authorised users can take, for 
example, users could read/write/delete, or read only, or append only
» using access rights to manage the parts of the database they have access 
to, for example, the provisions of different views of the data for different 
users to allow only certain users access to some tables
» automatic creation and scheduling of regular back-ups
» encryption of the data stored
» automatic creation of an audit trail or activity log to record the actions 
taken by users of the database.
8.2.2 The use and purpose of DBMS software tools
Developer interface
The developer interface allows a developer to write queries in structured 
query language (SQL) rather than using query-by-example. These queries 
are then processed and executed by the query processor. This allows the 
construction of more complex queries to interrogate the database.
Query processor
The query processor takes a query written in SQL and processes it. The query 
processor includes a DDL interpreter, a DML compiler and a query evaluation 
engine. Any DDL statements are interpreted and recorded in the database’s data 
dictionary. DML statements are compiled into low level instructions that are 
executed by the query evaluation engine. The DML compiler will also optimise 
the query.
ACTIVITY 8F
1 a) Describe how a DBMS overcomes the limitations of a file-based 
approach to the storage and retrieval of data.
b) Describe how a DBMS ensures that data stored in a database is 
secure.
2
 a) Describe three features provided by a DBMS.
b) A school stores timetabling data for all pupils and classes.
 Which features could a DBMS use to ensure that the administrators, 
teachers and pupils can only see the information available to them?
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   210 25/04/19   10:01 AM