75
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
Memory sticks/flash memories (also known as pen drives) use solid state 
technology. They usually connect to the computer through the USB port. Their 
main advantage is that they are very small, lightweight devices which make 
them suitable for transferring files between computers. They can also be used 
as small back-up devices for music or photo files, for example.
Complex or expensive software, such as an expert system, will often use a 
memory stick as a dongle. The dongle contains additional files which are 
needed to run the software. Without this dongle, the software will not work 
properly. It therefore prevents illegal or unauthorised use of the software, and 
also prevents copying of the software since, without the dongle, it is useless.
Optical media: CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray discs
CDs and DVDS are described as optical storage devices. Laser light is used to 
read data from, and write data onto, the surface of a disk.
▲ Figure 3.7 CDs and DVDs use a single, spiral track
Both CDs and DVDs use a thin layer of metal alloy or light-sensitive organic 
dye to store the data. As shown in Figure 3.7, both systems use a single, spiral 
track which runs from the centre of the disk to the edge. When a disk spins, the 
optical head moves to the point where the laser beam ‘contacts’ the disk surface 
and follows the spiral track from the centre outwards. As with an HDD, a CD/DVD 
is divided into sectors allowing direct access of data. Also, as in the case of an 
HDD, the outer part of the disk runs faster than the inner part of the disk.
The data is stored in ‘pits’ and ‘bumps’ on the spiral track. A red laser is used to 
read and write the data. CDs and DVDs can be designated R (write once only) or 
RW (can be written to or read from many times).
DVD technology is slightly different to that used in CDs. One of the main 
differences is the use of dual layering which considerably increases the 
storage capacity. This means that there are two individual recording 
layers. Two layers of a standard DVD are joined together with a transparent 
(polycarbonate) spacer, and a very thin reflector is sandwiched between the 
two layers. Reading and writing of the second layer is done by a red laser 
focusing at a fraction of a millimetre difference compared to the first layer.
single spiral track runs
from the centre to outer
part of disk
pits or bumps
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3C
The outer part of an optical disk runs faster than the inner part of the disk. 
Find out how manufacturers have overcome this issue with regards to disk 
data capacity and data access time.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   75 26/04/19   7:27 AM