73
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
Secondary storage devices
Secondary storage includes storage devices that are not directly accessible by 
the CPU. They are non-volatile devices which allow data to be stored as long as 
required by the user. This type of storage is much larger than primary memory, 
but data access time is considerably slower than RAM and ROM. All applications, 
the operating system, device drivers and general files (for example, documents, 
photos and music) are stored on secondary storage. The following section 
discusses the various types of secondary storage that can be found on the 
majority of computers. Secondary storage devices fall into three categories: 
magnetic, solid state and optical.
Hard disk drives (HDD)
Hard disk drives (HDD) are still one of the most common methods used to 
store data on a computer.
Data is stored in a digital format on the magnetic surfaces of the disks 
(or platters, as they are frequently called). The hard disk drive will have a 
number of platters which can spin at about 7000 times a second. A number 
of read-write heads can access all of the surfaces in the disk drive. Normally 
each platter will have two surfaces which can be used to store the data. 
These read-write heads can move very quickly – typically they can move from 
the centre of the disk to the edge of the disk (and back again) 50 times a 
second.
Data is stored on the surface in sectors and tracks.
A sector on a given track will contain a fixed number of bytes.
Unfortunately, hard disk drives have very slow data access when compared 
to, for example, RAM. Many applications require the read-write heads to 
constantly seek for the correct blocks of data; this means a large number of 
head movements. The effects of latency  then become very significant. Latency 
is defined as the time it takes for a specific block of data on a data track to 
rotate around to the read-write head.
Users will sometimes notice the effect of latency when they see messages such 
as, ‘Please wait’ or, at its worst, ‘not responding’.
When a file or data is stored on an HDD, the required number of sectors needed 
to store the data will be allocated. However, the sectors allocated may not be 
adjacent to each other. Through time, the HDD will undergo numerous deletions 
and editing, which leads to sectors becoming increasingly fragmented, 
resulting in a gradual deterioration of the HDD performance (in other words, it 
takes longer and longer to access data). Defragmentation software can improve 
on this situation by ‘tidying up’ the disk sectors.
An HDD is a direct access device; however, data in a given sector will be read 
sequentially.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 3A
Describe how ROM and RAM chips could be used in:
a) a microwave oven
b) a refrigerator
c) a remote-controlled model aeroplane (the movement of the aeroplane is 
controlled by a hand-held device).
track
sector
▲ Figure 3.6 Tracks and 
sectors on a hard disk drive
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   73 26/04/19   7:27 AM