18
1
1 InformatIon representatIon and multImedIa 
Note: when saving a bit-map image, it is important to include a file header; this will 
contain items such as file type (.bmp or .jpeg), file size, image resolution, bit depth 
(usually 1, 8, 16, 24 or 32), any type of data compression employed and so on.
1.2.2 Vector graphics
Vector graphics are images that use 2D points to describe lines and curves and 
their properties that are grouped to form geometric shapes. Vector graphics 
can be designed using computer aided design (CAD) software or using an 
application which uses a drawing canvas on the screen. See Figure 1.4.
A vector graphic will contain a drawing list (included in a file header) that is 
made up of
» the command used for each object that makes up the graphic image
» the attributes that define the properties that make up each object (for 
example consider the ellipse of the robot’s mouth – this will need the 
position of the two centres, the radius from centres, the thickness and style 
of each line, the line colour and any fill colour used)
» the relative position of each object will also need to be included
» the dimensions of each object are not defined, but the relative positions of 
objects to each other in the final graphic need to be defined; this means 
that scaling up the vector graphic image will result in no loss of quality.
When printing out vector graphics it is usually necessary to first convert it into 
a bit-map image to match the format of most printers.
Comparison between vector graphics and bit-map images
Vector graphic images Bit-map images
made up of geometric shapes which 
require definition/attributes made up of tiny pixels of different colours
to alter/edit the design, it is necessary 
to change each of the geometric shapes
possible to alter/edit each of the pixels to 
change the design of the image
they do not require large file size since 
it is made up of simple geometric shapes
because of the use of pixels (which give very 
accurate designs), the file size is very large
because the number of geometric shapes 
is limited, vector graphics are not 
usually very realistic
since images are built up pixel by pixel, the 
final image is usually very realistic
file formats are usually .svg, .cgm, .odg file formats are usually .jpeg, .bmp, .png
▲ Table 1.8 Comparison between vector graphics and bit-map images
It is now worth considering whether a vector graphic or a bit-map image would 
be the best choice for a given application. When deciding which is the better 
method, we should consider the following:
» Does the image need to be resized? If so, a vector graphic could be the best 
option.
» Does the image need to be drawn to scale? Again, a vector graphic is 
probably the best option.
» Does the image need to look real? Usually bit-map images look more realistic 
than vector graphics.
» Are there file restrictions? If so, it is important to consider whether vector 
graphic images can be used; if not, it would be necessary to consider the 
image resolution of a bit-map image to ensure the file size is not too large.
▲ Figure 1.4 Drawing of a 
robot made up of a number 
of geometric shapes
457591_01_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_001-026.indd   18 25/04/19   9:11 AM