31
2.1 Networking
2
Networks can be categorised as private or public.
Private networks are owned by a single company or organisation (they are 
often LANs or intranets with restricted user access, for example, passwords and 
user ids are required to join the network); the companies are responsible for the 
purchase of their own equipment and software, maintenance of the network and 
the hiring and training of staff.
Public networks are owned by a communications carrier company (such as 
a telecoms company); many organisations will use the network and there are 
usually no specific password requirements to enter the network – but sub-
networks may be under security management.
WANs and LANs
Local area networks (LANs)
LANs are usually contained within one building, or within a small geographical 
area. A typical LAN consists of a number of computers and devices (such as 
printers) connected to hubs or switches. One of the hubs or switches is usually 
connected to a router and/or modem to allow the LAN to connect to the 
internet or become part of a wide area network (WAN).
Wireless LANs (WLANs)
Wireless LANs (WLANs) are similar to LANs but there are no wires or cables. 
In other words, they provide wireless network communications over fairly 
short distances (up to 100 metres) using radio or infrared signals instead of 
using cables.
Devices, known as wireless access points (WAPs), are connected into 
the wired network at fixed locations. Because of the limited range, most 
commercial LANs (such as those on a college campus or at an airport) need 
several WAPs to permit uninterrupted wireless communications. The WAPs use 
either spread spectrum technology (which is a wideband radio frequency with 
a range from a few metres to 100 metres) or infrared (which has a very short 
range of about 1 to 2 metres and is easily blocked, and therefore has limited 
use; see Section 2.1.5 Wired and wireless networking).
The WAP receives and transmits data between the WLAN and the wired network 
structure. End users access the WLAN through wireless LAN adapters which are 
built into the devices or as a plug in module.
WAP
WAP
WAP
▲	Figure	2.2 Wireless local area networks (WLAN)
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   31 4/30/19   7:45 AM