71
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
Dynamic RAM (DRAM)
Each DRAM chip consists of a number of transistors and capacitors. Each of 
these parts is tiny since a single RAM chip will contain millions of capacitors 
and transistors.
» Capacitors hold the bits of information (0 or 1).
» Transistors act like switches; they allow the chip control circuitry to read the 
capacitor or change the capacitor’s value.
This type of RAM needs to be constantly refreshed (that is, the capacitor 
needs to be re-charged every 15 microseconds otherwise it would lose its 
value). If it is not refreshed, the capacitor’s charge will leak away very quickly, 
leaving every capacitor with the value 0.
DRAMs have a number of advantages over SRAMs. They:
» are much less expensive to manufacture than SRAMs
» consume less power than SRAMs
» have a higher memory capacity than SRAMs.
Static RAM (SRAM)
A major difference between SRAM and DRAM is that SRAM does not need to be 
constantly refreshed.
It makes use of flip flops (see Chapter 15) which hold each bit of memory.
SRAM is much faster than DRAM when it comes to data access (typically, access 
time for SRAM is 25 nanoseconds and for DRAM is 60 nanoseconds).
DRAM is the most common type of RAM used in computers, but where absolute 
speed is essential, for example in the processor’s memory cache, SRAM is the 
preferred technology. Memory cache is a high speed portion of the memory. 
It is effective because most programs access the same data or instructions 
many times. By keeping as much of this information as possible in SRAM, the 
computer avoids having to access the slower DRAM.
Table 3.1 summarises the differences between DRAM and SRAM.
DRAM SRAM
n consists of a number of transistors and 
capacitors
n needs to be constantly refreshed
n less expensive to manufacture than SRAM
n has a higher memory capacity than SRAM
n main memory is constructed from DRAM
n consumes more power than SRAM under 
reasonable levels of access, as it needs 
to be constantly refreshed
n uses flip-flops to hold each bit of 
memory
n does not need to be constantly 
refreshed
n has a faster data access time than DRAM
n processor memory cache makes use  
of SRAM
n if accessed at a high frequency, power 
usage can exceed that of DRAM
▲ Table 3.1 Differences between DRAM and SRAM
Another form of primary memory is the read-only memory (ROM). This is similar 
to RAM in that it shares the same random access properties, but it cannot 
be written to or changed. As the name suggests, ROM is a read-only memory 
device.
ROMs are
» non-volatile (the contents are not lost after powering off the computer)
» permanent memory devices (the contents cannot be changed)
▲ Figure 3.4 Two pieces 
of dynamic random access 
memory (DRAM)
▲ Figure 3.5 Static RAM
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   71 26/04/19   7:27 AM