xii
Command 
word
What it means
State express in clear terms
Suggest apply knowledge and understanding to situations where there are a 
range of valid responses in order to make proposals
Summarise select and present the main points, without detail
Write write an answer in a specific way
From the authors
We hope you enjoy this book. It encourages you to develop your computational 
thinking while broadening your understanding of computer science. This 
should prove helpful when you go on to further study, where topics such as 
artificial intelligence, quantum cryptography and imperative and declarative 
programming will be studied; all of these are covered in the later chapters of 
the book. In order to handle such topics confidently, you will need to be a 
competent programmer who uses computational thinking to solve problems and 
has a good understanding of computer architecture. All chapters are designed 
to build on your previous experience in a way that develops essential skills and 
at the same time expands the techniques you are able to use.
David Watson
Helen Williams
Notes for teachers
Key concepts
These are the essential ideas that help learners to develop a deep 
understanding of the subject and to make links between the different topics. 
Although teachers are likely to have these in mind at all times when they are 
teaching the syllabus, the following icons are included in the textbook at 
points where the key concepts relate to the text:
Computational thinking 
Computational thinking is a set of fundamental skills that help produce 
a solution to a problem. Skills such as abstraction, decomposition and 
algorithmic thinking are used to study a problem and design a solution that 
can be implemented. This may involve using a range of technologies and 
programming languages.
Programming paradigms
A programming paradigm is a way of thinking about or approaching problems. 
There are many different programming styles that can be used, which are 
suited to unique functions, tools and specific situations. An understanding of 
programming paradigms is essential to ensure they are used appropriately, when 
designing and building programs.
IntRoDUCtIon
457591_FM_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_i-xiv.indd   12 4/30/19   7:42 AM