76 3 Hardware
3
polycarbonate layer first layer
second layer
laser reads
layer 2
laser reads
layer 1
polycarbonate layer
▲ Figure 3.8 Dual layering in a DVD
Standard, single layer DVDs still have a larger storage capacity than CDs because 
the ‘pit’ size and track width are both smaller. This means that more data can be 
stored on the DVD surface. DVDs use lasers with a wavelength of 650 nanometres; 
CDs use lasers with a wavelength of 780 nanometres. The shorter the wavelength 
of the laser light, the greater the storage capacity of the medium.
» Blu-ray discs are another example of optical storage media. However, they 
are fundamentally different to DVDs in their construction and in the way 
they carry out read-write operations.
» Blu-ray uses a blue laser, rather than a red laser, to carry out read and write 
operations; the wavelength of blue light is only 405 nanometres (compared 
to 650 nm for red light).
» Using blue laser light means that the ‘pits’ and ‘bumps’ can be much smaller; 
consequently, a Blu-ray can store up to five times more data than a DVD.
» Blu-ray uses a single 1.1 mm thick polycarbonate disk; DVDs use a sandwich 
of two 0.6 mm thick disks.
» Using two sandwiched layers can cause birefringence (light is refracted into 
two separate beams causing reading errors); because Blu-ray uses only one 
layer, the discs do not suffer from birefringence.
» Blu-ray discs automatically come with a secure encryption system which 
helps to prevent piracy and copyright infringement.
Table 3.4 summarises the main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray.
disk type
laser 
colour
wavelength  
of laser light disk construction
track pitch 
(distance 
between tracks)
CD red 780
 nm single 1.2 mm 
polycarbonate layer
1.60 µm
DVD red 650 nm two 0.6 mm 
polycarbonate layers
0.74 µm
Blu-ray blue 405 nm single 1.1 mm 
polycarbonate layer
0.30 µm
nm = 10−9 metres
µm = 10−6 metres
▲ Table 3.4 Main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray
All these optical storage media are used as back-up systems (for photos, 
music and multimedia files). This also means that CDs and DVDs can be used 
to transfer files between computers. Manufacturers sometimes supply their 
software (such as printer drivers) on CDs and DVDs. When the software is 
supplied in this way, the disk is usually in a read-only format.
The most common use of DVD and Blu-ray is the supply of movies or games. The 
memory capacity of CDs is not big enough to store most movies.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   76 26/04/19   7:27 AM