21
11.3 File compression
In both single frame and video versions, the camera picks up the light from 
the image and turns it into an electronic signal using light-sensitive sensors. 
In the case of the DV cameras, these signals are automatically converted into a 
compressed digital file format.
When recording video, the frame rate refers to the number of frames recorded 
per second.
1.3 File compression
Key terms
Lossless file compression – file compression method 
where the original file can be restored following 
decompression.
Lossy file compression – file compression method 
where parts of the original file cannot be recovered 
during decompression, so some of the original detail  
is lost.
JPEG – Joint Photographic Expert Group – a form of 
lossy file compression based on the inability of the eye 
to spot certain colour changes and hues.
MP3/MP4 files – file compression method used for 
music and multimedia files.
Audio compression  – method used to reduce the size of 
a sound file using perceptual music shaping.
Perceptual music shaping – method where sounds 
outside the normal range of hearing of humans, for 
example, are eliminated from the music file during 
compression.
Bit rate – number of bits per second that can be 
transmitted over a network. It is a measure of the data 
transfer rate over a digital telecoms network.
Run length encoding (RLE) – a lossless file 
compression technique used to reduce text and photo 
files in particular.
It is often necessary to reduce the file size of a file to either save storage 
space or to reduce the time taken to stream or transmit data from one device 
to another (see Chapter 2). The two most common forms of file compression are 
lossless file compression and lossy file compression.
Lossless file compression
With this technique, all the data from the original file can be reconstructed 
when the file is uncompressed again. This is particularly important for files 
where loss of any data would be disastrous (such as a spreadsheet file of 
important results).
Lossy file compression
With this technique, the file compression algorithm eliminates unnecessary 
data (as with MP3 and JPEG formats, for example).
Lossless file compression is designed to lose none of the original detail from 
the file (such as Run-Length Encoding (RLE) which is covered later in this 
chapter). Lossy file compression usually results in some loss of detail when 
compared to the original; it is usually impossible to reconstruct the original 
file. The algorithms used in the lossy technique have to decide which parts of 
the file are important (and need to be kept) and which parts can be discarded.
We will now consider file compression techniques applied to multimedia files.
1.3.1 File compression applications
MPEG-3 (MP3) and MPEG-4 (MP4) 
MPEG-3 (MP3) uses technology known as audio compression to convert 
music and other sounds into an MP3 file format. Essentially, this compression 
technology will reduce the size of a normal music file by about 90%. For example, 
an 80
 MB music file on a CD can be reduced to 8 MB using MP3 technology.
457591_01_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_001-026.indd   21 25/04/19   9:11 AM