185
7.1 Legal, moral, ethical and cultural implications
7
All of these examples are cost-related, but still had – or potentially had – an 
impact on the general public. Regrettably, there are many other examples. 
Other issues which can affect the general public and businesses include
» companies selling software systems which do not meet the required standard 
for security (inadequate protection against hacking, spyware and other 
security issues)
» the covering up of security issues (such as the XEN security threat which 
forced several cloud servers to become compromised – an attempt was made 
to cover up the issue but the affected cloud operators had to come clean)
» the release of private data (such as the celebrity photo leaks, when a cloud 
server was hacked)
» social media not policing subversive activity, such as hate mail and cyber 
bullying. Such activity is undergoing close scrutiny by several countries 
around the world
» search engines giving results at the top of the search due to donations to 
the search engine operators.
EXTENSION ACTIVITY 7B
Bearing in mind some of the issues raised above, consider these two 
questions.
1 Should we police the internet to stop certain activities taking place?
2 Should governments have the power to close down websites (such as 
Twitter or Facebook) which do not remove hate mail, incitements to 
violence or unacceptable photographs from their sites?
ACTIVITY 7A
1 Describe why it is necessary to produce a code of ethics to cover the 
computing and electronics industries.
2
 Mariam and Asma were having a discussion about whether or not the 
internet should be policed.
 Mariam was in favour of the argument and put forward two reasons.
① It would prevent illegal material being posted on websites, such as 
racist comments, pornography, terrorist activities and so on.
② Some form of control would prevent children and other vulnerable 
groups being subjected to undesirable websites.
 Asma was against the argument and put forward two of her own reasons.
① Material published on websites is already available from other 
sources.
② Policing would go against freedom of information and freedom of 
speech.
 Put forward your own arguments and discuss whether you think Mariam’s 
or Asma’s reasons are valid.
3
 Describe the main differences between the terms: legal , morality, ethics 
and culture.
 Give examples of each.
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   185 25/04/19   9:52 AM