184 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
health
and safety
concerns
in the
public
interest
benefits
to the
public
concerns
of the
public
PUBLIC
WELL
BEING
▲ Figure 7.1 Potential impact of software or hardware being developed on  
the general public
While software engineers and scientists consider the Software Engineering Code 
of Ethics, the impact on the general public cannot be ignored.
This section begins by considering three instances in which computer hardware 
or software led to expensive errors, which impacted on the general public.
LA airport shutdown in 2007
In this example, aeroplanes at LA airport (in the USA) were grounded due to a simple software issue: a faulty network 
card in a device continued to send incorrect data over the airport’s network. Eventually, the whole of the USA Customs 
and Borders Agency came to an abrupt standstill at LA airport. This resulted in all flights leaving and landing at the 
airport being cancelled for about eight hours until the fault was cleared. It cost several million US dollars in lost 
revenue to the aeroplane operators. The impact on the general public was cancellation of holidays, loss of business 
and general frustration.
Exploding laptop computers in 2008
Japan holds an annual trade show displaying the latest in computer technology. In 2008, during the trade show, a 
number of Dell laptop computers burst into flames under the full view of the visiting public and television cameras. 
The problem was traced back to faulty batteries in the laptops which had been overheating and eventually exploded 
and burst into flames. As if this was not enough, the problem escalated when Apple reported similar problems with 
some of its tablets, laptops and desktop computers. Some 100 million computer devices had to be recalled at an 
estimated cost of over 300 million US dollars to the manufacturers. The impact on the general public would have been 
devastating if this problem had not been discovered before the devices were generally available to buy.
Airbus A380 incompatible software issue in 2006
In Europe, Airbus Industries uses a number of factories throughout Europe where the design, development and 
construction of aeroplanes takes place. During 2006, while the new A380 was being developed, a surprising issue 
came to life: the software in two factories would not ‘talk to each other’. The factory in Hamburg (Germany) was 
using an old version of CATIA design software while another plant in Toulouse (France) was using the latest version of 
CATIA software. When a part of the A380 from Hamburg and a part of the A380 from Toulouse were brought together 
for assembly, the wiring in the two parts did not match up (the cables could not be linked together). This was all 
due to the fact that the two versions of the software produced different design specifications for the wiring. It cost 
the company millions of Euros to redo the design and remanufacturing of parts where old software was still in use. 
Fortunately, this was not a safety issue, but if some other design incompatibility had occurred after assembly of an 
A380, the effect could have been catastrophic leading to possible loss of life.
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   184 25/04/19   9:52 AM