200 8 Databases
8
Now data is independent of the program processing it. The terms record and 
field are also used in file processing, so there is more rigorous terminology 
used specifically for relational databases. Files of data are replaced by tables, 
with each row of a table representing a record (a tuple, sometimes called a 
logical record or an occurrence of an entity). Each column of the table is an 
attribute that can also be referred to as a field.
An entity is anything that can have data stored about it, such as a person, 
place, event or object. An attribute is an individual data item stored for an 
entity; to use the same example as before, for a student attributes could 
include first name, second name, date of birth and class. As stated before, a 
table is a group of similar data, in a database, with rows for each instance of 
an entity and columns for each attribute. A tuple is one instance of an entity, 
which is represented by a row in a table.
First Name Second Name Date Of Birth Class ID
Noor Baig 09/22/2010 7A ← each row is a tuple
Ahmed Sayed 06/11/2010 7B
Tahir Hassan 01/30/2011 7A
↑
each column is an attribute
▲ Table 8.2 Part of a table for student entity
Data is shared between applications using the database. In order to ensure the 
consistency of data updating is controlled or automatic, so that any copies of a 
data item are changed to the new value. Also, in order to reduce the number of 
copies of a data item to a minimum, a relational database uses pointers between 
tables.  These pointers are keys that provide relationships between tables.
There are different types of keys.
» A candidate key is an attribute or smallest set of attributes in a table 
where no tuple has the same value. 
» A primary key is a unique identifier for a table, it is a special case of a 
candidate key.
» A secondary key is a candidate key that is an alternative to the primary key.
» A foreign key is a set of attributes in one table that refer to the primary 
key in another table.
For example, a database of chemical elements contains a table Elements with 
attributes Symbol, Name and Atomic Weight. As all these attributes are 
unique to each element, all are candidate keys. One of these could be chosen as 
the primary key, for example Symbol. Then the other two attributes, Name and 
Atomic Weight, would be secondary keys. 
all attributes are candidate keys
                                                 ↓                                               
Symbol Name Atomic Weight
H Hydrogen 1.008
Li Lithium 6.94
Na Sodium 22.990
↑ 
Symbol is the primary key
↑ 
Name and Atomic Weight are secondary keys
▲ Table 8.3 Part of a table of elements
↓ ↓
↓
457591_08_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_196-216.indd   200 25/04/19   10:01 AM