160 6 Security, privacy and data integrity
6
6.1.1	 Data privacy
Data stored about a person or an organisation must remain private and 
unauthorised access to the data must be prevented – data privacy is required.
This is achieved partly by data protection laws. These laws vary from country 
to country, but all follow the same eight guiding principles.
1 Data must be fairly and lawfully processed.
2 Data can only be processed for the stated purpose.
3 Data must be adequate, relevant and not excessive.
4 Data must be accurate.
5 Data must not be kept longer than necessary.
6 Data must be processed in accordance with the data subject’s rights.
7 Data must be kept secure.
8  Data must not be transferred to another country unless that country also has 
adequate protection.
Data protection laws usually cover organisations rather than private 
individuals. Such laws are no guarantee of privacy, but the legal threat of fines 
or jail sentences deters most people.
6.1.2	 Preventing data loss and restricting data access
Data security refers to the methods used to prevent unauthorised access to 
data, as well as to the data recovery methods if it is lost.
User accounts
User accounts are used to authenticate a user (prove that a user is who 
they say they are). User accounts are used on both standalone and networked 
computers in case the computer can be accessed by a number of people. This is 
often done by a screen prompt asking for a username and password:
Malware – malicious software that seeks to damage or 
gain unauthorised access to a computer system.
Firewall – software or hardware that sits between 
a computer and external network that monitors and 
filters all incoming and outgoing activities.
Anti-spyware 	software  – software that detects and 
removes spyware programs installed illegally on a 
user’s computer system.
Encryption  – the use of encryption keys to make data 
meaningless without the correct decryption key.
Biometrics  – use of unique human characteristics to 
identify a user (such as fingerprints or face recognition).
Hacking – illegal access to a computer system without 
the owner’s permission.
Malicious
	hacking – hacking done with the sole intent 
of causing harm to a computer system or user (for 
example, deletion of files or use of private data to the 
hacker’s advantage).
Ethical	hacking – hacking used to test the security 
and vulnerability of a computer system. The hacking is 
carried out with the permission of the computer system 
owner, for example, to help a company identify risks 
associated with malicious hacking of their computer 
systems.
Phishing – legitimate-looking emails designed to trick 
a recipient into giving their personal data to the sender 
of the email.
Pharming – redirecting a user to a fake website in order 
to illegally obtain personal data about the user.
DNS
	cache	poisoning	– altering IP addresses on a DNS 
server by a ‘pharmer’ or hacker with the intention of 
redirecting a user to their fake website.
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   160 25/04/19   9:35 AM