83
3.1 Computers and their components 
3
Drawbacks
» Only allows use of bare fingers as the form of input; although the latest 
screens permit the use of a special stylus to be used.
Resistive
» Makes use of an upper layer of polyester (a form of plastic) and a bottom 
layer of glass.
» When the top polyester layer is touched, the top layer and bottom layer 
complete a circuit.
» Signals are then sent out, which are interpreted by a microprocessor 
and the calculations determine the coordinates of where the screen was 
touched.
Benefits
» Relatively inexpensive technology.
» Possible to use bare fingers, gloved fingers or stylus to carry out an input 
operation.
Drawbacks
» Screen visibility is poor in strong sunlight.
» Does not permit multi-touch capability.
» Screen durability is only fair; it is vulnerable to scratches and the screen 
wears out through time.
Virtual headsets
Virtual reality has now been around for many years and has many applications. 
For example, it is possible to ‘walk around’ inside dangerous areas – such as a 
nuclear power plant – without actually being there.
It allows engineers to plan modifications or repairs to a plant in complete 
safety and to try out different scenarios first before implementing them. One 
of the devices used is a virtual reality headset which gives the engineer the 
feeling of being there. We will now describe how these devices work.
» Video is sent from a computer to the headset (either using an HDMI cable or 
a smartphone fitted into the headset).
» Two feeds are sent to an LCD/OLED display (sometimes two screens are 
used, one for the left side of the image and one for the right side of the 
image); lenses placed between the eyes and the screen allow for focusing 
and reshaping of the image/video for each eye, thus giving a 3D effect and 
adding to the realism.
» Most headsets use 110° field of view which is enough to give a pseudo 360° 
surround image/video.
» A frame rate of 60 to 120 images per second is used to give a true/realistic 
image.
» As the user moves their head (up and down or left to right), a series of 
sensors and/or LEDs measure this movement, which allows the image/video 
on the screen to react to the user’s head movements (sensors are usually 
gyroscopic or accelerometers; LEDs are used in conjunction with mini 
cameras to further monitor head movements).
» Headsets also use binaural sound (surround sound) so that the speaker 
output appears to come from behind, from the side or from a distance, 
giving very realistic 3D sound.
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   83 26/04/19   7:27 AM