56
2
	 2	CommuniCation
Phone calls using the internet
Phone calls using the internet use either an internet phone or microphone and 
speakers (video calls also require a webcam).
The internet connection is only ‘live’ while data (sound/video image) is being 
transmitted.
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) converts sound to digital packages 
(encoding) which can be sent over the internet.
VoIP uses packet switching; the networks simply send and retrieve data as it 
is needed so there is no dedicated line, unlike PSTN. Data is routed through 
thousands of possible pathways, allowing the fastest route to be determined.
The conversation (data) is split into data packages. Each packet contains at 
least the sender’s address, receiver’s address and order number of packet – the 
sending computer sends the data to its router which sends the packets to 
another router, and so on. At the receiving end, the packets are reassembled 
into the original state (see Chapter 14 for more details).
VoIP also carries out file compression to reduce the amount of data being 
transmitted.
Because the link only exists while data is being transmitted, a typical 10 
minute phone call may only contain about 3 minutes where people are talking; 
thus only 3
 MB of data is transmitted making it much more efficient than PSTN.
Cellular networks and satellites
Other devices, such as mobile phones, use the cellular network. Here, the 
mobile phone providers act as the ISPs and the phones contain communication 
software which allows them to access the telephone network and also permits 
them to make an internet connection.
Satellites are an important part of all network communications that cover 
vast distances. Due to the curvature of the Earth, the height of the satellite’s 
orbit determines how much coverage it can give. Figure 2.22 shows how 
satellites are classified according to how high they orbit in relation to the 
Earth’s surface.
35 800 km
5000–12 000 km
500–2500 km
GEO
MEO
LEO
Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) provide long distance telephone and computer network communications;
orbital period = 24 hours
Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) used for GPS systems (about 10 MEO satellites are currently orbiting the Earth);
orbital period = 2 to 12 hours
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) used by the mobile phone networks (there are currently more than 100 LEO satellites
orbiting the Earth); orbital period = 80 mins to 2 hours
diagram not to scale
▲	Figure	2.22 Satellite classification
457591_02_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_027-067.indd   56 4/30/19   7:45 AM