148 	 5	SyStem	Software
5
Developing software in this way
» removes the need to rewrite the many routines every single time (thus 
saving considerable time and cost)
» leads to modular programming, which means several programmers can be 
working on the same piece of software at the same time
» allows continuity with other games that may form part of a whole range  
(in education, where there may be a whole suite of programs, for example)
» allows the maintenance of a ‘corporate image’ in all the software being 
developed by a particular company
» saves considerable development time having to test each routine, since the 
routines are all fully tested in other software and should be error-free.
All operating systems have two program libraries containing library programs 
and library routines: static and dynamic.
In static libraries, software being developed is linked to executable code in the 
library at the time of compilation. So the library routines would be embedded 
directly into the new program code.
In dynamic libraries, software being developed is not linked to the library 
routines until actual run time (these are known as dynamic link library files 
or DLL). These library routines would be stand-alone files only being accessed 
as required by the new program – the routines will be available to several 
applications at the same time.
When using DLL, since the library routines are not loaded into RAM until 
required, memory is saved, and software runs faster. For example, suppose 
we are writing new software which allows access to a printer as part of its 
specification. The main program will be developed and compiled. Once the 
object code is run, it will only access (and load up) the printer routine from DLL 
when required by the user of the program. The main program will only contain a 
link to the printer library routine and will not contain any of the actual printer 
routine coding in the main body. Table 5.2 summarises the pros and cons of 
using DLL files.
Pros of using DLL files Cons of using DLL files
the executable code of the main program is much smaller 
since DLL files are only loaded into memory at run time
the executable code is not self-contained, therefore all 
DLL files need to be available at run time otherwise error 
messages (such as missing .dll error) will be generated and 
the software may even crash
it is possible to make changes to DLL files independently 
of the main program, consequently if any changes are 
made to the DLL files it will not be necessary to recompile 
the main program
any DLL linking software in the main program needs to be 
available at run time to allow links with DLL files to be 
made
DLL files can be made available to a number of 
applications at the same time
if any of the DLL files have been changed (either 
intentionally or through corruption) this could lead to the 
main program giving unexpected results or even crashing
all of the above save memory and also save execution time malicious changes to DLL files could be due to the result 
of malware, thus presenting a risk to the main program 
following the linking process
▲ Table	5.2 Pros and cons of using DLL files
457591_05_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_136-158.indd   148 25/04/19   9:27 AM