78 3 Hardware
3
Inkjet printers
Inkjet printers are made up of
» a print head consisting of nozzles that spray droplets of ink onto the paper 
to form characters
» an ink cartridge or cartridges; either one cartridge for each colour (blue, 
yellow and magenta) and a black cartridge, or one single cartridge 
containing all three colours and black (note: some systems use six colours)
» a stepper motor and belt which moves the print head assembly across the 
page from side to side
» a paper feed which automatically feeds the printer with pages as they are 
required.
The ink droplets are currently produced using one of two technologies: thermal 
bubble or piezoelectric.
Thermal bubble – tiny resistors create localised heat which makes the ink 
vaporise. This causes the ink to form a tiny bubble, as the bubble expands 
some of the ink is ejected from the print head onto the paper. When the 
bubble collapses, a small vacuum is created which allows fresh ink to 
be drawn into the print head. This continues until the printing cycle is 
completed.
Piezoelectric – a crystal is located at the back of the ink reservoir for each 
nozzle. The crystal is given a tiny electric charge which makes it vibrate. This 
vibration forces ink to be ejected onto the paper and at the same time more ink 
is drawn in for further printing.
When a user wishes to print a document using an inkjet printer, the following 
sequence of events takes place. Whatever technology is used, the basic steps in 
the printing process are the same.
Stage Description of what happens
1 data from the document is sent to a printer driver
2 printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer 
can understand
3 check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is 
available to print (is it busy? is it off-line? is it out of ink? and so on)
4 data is sent to the printer and stored in a temporary memory known as a 
printer buffer
5 a sheet of paper is fed into the main body of the printer. A sensor detects 
whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of paper (or 
the paper is jammed), an error message is sent back to the computer
6 as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from 
side to side across the paper printing the text or image. The four ink colours 
are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour
7 at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very 
slightly to allow the next line to be printed. This continues until the whole 
page has been printed
8 if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage 
5 is repeated until the buffer is empty
9 once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the processor 
in the computer, which is a request for more data to be sent to the printer. The 
process continues until the whole of the document has been printed
▲ Table 3.6 Sequence to print using a laser printer
▲ Figure 3.10 An inkjet 
printer
457591_03_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_068-106.indd   78 26/04/19   7:27 AM