116 	 4	Processor	fundamentals
4
The technology is analogue and, as mentioned in the previous section, is being 
phased out.
Table 4.3 summarises the pros and cons of HDMI and VGA.
Pros of HDMI Cons of HDMI
n the current standard for modern 
televisions and monitors
n allows for a very fast data transfer rate
n improved security (helps prevent piracy)
n supports modern digital systems
n not a very robust connection (easy to 
break connection when simply moving 
device)
n limited cable length to retain good 
signal
n there are currently five cable/
connection standards
Pros of VGA Cons of VGA
n simpler technology
n only one standard available
n it is easy to split the signal and connect 
a number of devices from one source
n the connection is very secure
n old out-dated analogue technology
n it is easy to bend the pins when making 
connections
n the cables must be of a very high grade 
to ensure good undistorted signal
▲ Table	4.3 Pros and cons of HDMI and VGA
4 .1.6	 Fetch-execute cycle
We have already considered the role of buses and registers in the processor. 
This next section shows how an instruction is decoded and executed in the 
fetch-execute cycle using various components in the processor.
To execute a set of instructions, the processor first fetches data and 
instructions from memory and stores them in suitable registers. Both the 
address bus and data bus are used in this process. Once this is done, each 
instruction needs to be decoded before being executed.
Fetch
The next instruction is fetched from the memory address currently stored in the 
program counter (PC) and is then stored in the current instruction register 
(CIR). The PC is then incremented (increased by 1) so that the next instruction 
can be processed. This is decoded so that each instruction can be interpreted 
in the next part of the cycle.
Execute
The processor passes the decoded instruction as a set of control signals to 
the appropriate components within the computer system. This allows each 
instruction to be carried out in its logical sequence.
Figure 4.5 shows how the fetch-execute cycle is carried out in the Von 
Neumann computer model.
457591_04_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_107-135.indd   116 25/04/19   9:07 AM