193
7.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
7
Advertising and use of data
You may remember the Cambridge Analytica scandal in 2018 which hinged 
around potential misuse of data obtained from a social media company (nearly 
90 million profiles had been used by the company leading some people to 
believe it had influenced the 2016 USA presidential elections). AI could reduce 
such occurrences by allowing much closer monitoring. It would need to be very 
sophisticated and act quickly to have any real impact – human beings certainly 
could not respond fast enough.
Algorithms can now tailor advertising aimed at specific people by using AI 
machine learning – this is done by building personality profiles of every 
internet and mobile phone user. Data is picked up from search engines, social 
media and visits to websites – all this data can be analysed by machine 
learning algorithms (see Chapter 18 for more details).
ACTIVITY 7C
Look through this chapter on the impacts of AI and produce a short essay or 
wall display highlighting the pros and cons. Draw a reasoned conclusion and 
debate the overall impact of AI with your classmates.
ACTIVITY 7D
1 In 2017, Diane Bryant, the chief operating officer of Google Cloud, claimed 
that AI can:
n help us manage the Earth’s very scarce resources
n improve cancer diagnosis using precision medicine leading to 
customised treatments
n lead to improvements in human rights in many countries due to cloud 
computing, better connectivity and reduced costs in developing faster 
computers.
 Describe, with examples, why Ms Bryant’s claims could help people in the 
future.
2
 Give three different examples of AI.
 For each of your examples, give one  benefit and one drawback to the 
general public.
1 Nicolae has joined a software company as a new team manager. During his 
induction he was given a presentation on the company’s code of conduct and the 
company’s expected ethical behaviour.
 He was given hand-outs after the presentation which included the code of 
conduct and ethical behaviour.
a)
 Explain what is meant by the term ethics . [2]
b) Describe the differences between behaving in an unethical manner and in an 
illegal manner.  [3]
c) Nicolae joins a team writing new software in a programming language 
unfamiliar to him. Part of his job will be to visit a client and oversee the team 
writing the software to meet the client’s requirements.
End of chapter 
questions
➔
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   193 25/04/19   9:52 AM