161
6.1 Data security
6
User accounts control access rights . This often involves levels of access. For 
example, in a hospital it would not be appropriate for a cleaner to have 
access to data about one of the patients. However, a consultant would need 
such access. Therefore, most systems have a hierarchy of access levels 
depending on a person’s level of security. This could be achieved by 
username and password with each username (account) linked to the 
appropriate level of access.
Use of passwords
Passwords are used to restrict access to data or systems. They should be hard 
to crack and changed frequently to retain security. Passwords can also take the 
form of biometrics (such as on a mobile phone, as discussed later). Passwords 
are also used, for example, when
» accessing email accounts
» carrying out online banking or shopping
» accessing social networking sites.
It is important that passwords are protected. Some ways of doing this are to
» run anti-spyware software to make sure your passwords are not being relayed 
to whoever put the spyware on your computer
» regularly change passwords in case they have been seen by someone else, 
illegally or accidentally
» make sure passwords are difficult to crack or guess (for example, do not use 
your date of birth or pet’s name).
Passwords are grouped as either strong (hard to crack or guess) or weak 
(relatively easy to crack or guess). Strong passwords should contain
» at least one capital letter
» at least one numerical value
» at least one other keyboard character (such as @, *, &)
EXTENSION	
ACTIVITY	6A
An airport uses a 
computer system 
to control security, 
flight bookings, 
passenger lists, 
administration and 
customer services. 
Describe how it is 
possible to ensure 
the safety of the 
data on the system 
so that senior staff 
can see all data, 
while customers can 
only access flight 
times (arrivals and 
departures) and duty 
free offers.
▲ Figure	6.1 A login screen
username
Need an account? Sign Up
User login
password
keep me logged in
Forgot your password? Click here
Sign In
457591_06_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_159-177.indd   161 25/04/19   9:35 AM