182 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
There are 80 clauses and sub-clauses in total. We shall consider one scenario 
and see how it fits into a selection of the clauses.
Mikhail works during the day for a software company called EthicalGamz developing 
new software in a number of applications. Mikhail is part of a large team of software 
engineers writing and testing new code. The team also do market research to help in 
their development of new software for the future. Much of the work is commercially 
sensitive and multiple layers of access exist to protect the company from unauthorised 
sharing of data.
In the evenings and at the weekend, Mikhail works for his own company, MikhailSoft , 
which produces software available to buy on the internet only. To save costs, Mikhail 
uses coding he helped develop for EthicalGamz  in his own software. He also outsources 
some of the work to software engineers in other countries where the wages are much 
lower and ethics policies are more lax. This saves him a lot of time and money when 
producing his own software. Mikhail does not pay any licensing fees to EthicalGamz and 
makes no reference to any code used from that company in his own products.
We will now consider the ethical implications of the above scenario using the 
following sub-clauses from the Software Engineering Code of Ethics.
1.03  approve software only if they have a well-founded belief that it is safe, meets 
the specification and passes the appropriate tests and does not diminish the 
quality of life, diminish privacy or harm the environment;
There is an ethical issue here since the software written by personnel from 
other countries may not meet the specification requirements or appropriate 
tests. It could lead to any of the three factors being violated, for example,  
the software may contain spyware of which Mikhail is unaware.
2.02  not knowingly use software that is obtained or retained either illegally or 
unethically;
Mikhail has no control over the coding being developed by his overseas team, 
furthermore, using the coding from EthicalGamz is illegal use.
3.05  ensure an appropriate method is used for any project on which they work or 
propose to work;
Using external companies (in his own country or overseas) may be used at 
various steps in the production of Mikhail’s own software. Unless he applies 
good managerial control, he will be unable to ensure methods used in projects 
are appropriate or fully ethical in their implementation.
4.02  only endorse documents either prepared under their supervision or within their 
areas of competence and with which they are in agreement;
Documentation produced by third party developers is not produced under 
Mikhail’s direct supervision, indeed some of the work done overseas may be 
outside Mikhail’s sphere of knowledge which probably removes his ability to 
objectively endorse the external work being done.
5.03  ensure that software engineers know the employer’s policies and procedures 
for protecting passwords, files and information that is confidential to the 
employer or to others;
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   182 25/04/19   9:52 AM