192 7 Ethics and own Ership
7
» Detection of pollution in the air and in the seas using AI is much more 
accurate, allowing scientists to pinpoint the source(s) of pollution more 
accurately and much faster.
» In the future it could be possible to combine weather forecasting and AI 
to allow for better predictions about renewable energy resources needed 
for the next few days. This would lead to a more precise automated 
renewable energy forecast using solar, tide, thermal and wind energy 
generation.
» AI would allow us to learn from nature’s ecosystems by monitoring and 
modelling, for example, a river’s ecosystem. This would enable us to gain a 
better understanding of what can affect the delicate balance of life in the 
river. Such real-time environmental monitoring would allow us to quickly 
take remedial action before the affects became irreversible. AI would make 
this possible due to the ability to analyse vast amounts of very complex 
(inter-related) data.
We will now look at three particular areas where AI could have a large 
impact.
Transport
Some taxi companies are already looking at the introduction of autonomous 
(driverless) cars. A customer can call up the taxi using an app on their mobile 
phone, which also automatically handles the payment. Information about the 
taxi (such as its location and estimated arrival time) would be sent to the mobile 
phone until the driverless taxi arrives at the exact pick-up point. There would not 
be any people anywhere in the chain, with AI systems taking total control. Some 
car manufacturers are on the brink of actually supplying autonomous vehicles 
(cars, buses and trucks). This would be much more efficient but would put many 
drivers out of a job. 
Criminal justice system
Advances in facial recognition systems is making fingerprinting in forensic 
science almost obsolete. AI is also being used to automate legal work and some 
courts in the USA have trialled the use of AI to sentence criminals and even 
decide if a prisoner is eligible for parole.  Is this a bad thing? Here are some 
questions to think about:
» Does government use of AI need a warrant to allow online data to be 
searched for all potential criminal activity? 
» Can AI be used to listen in to our mobile phone conversations and assess our 
emails? Social media companies are already coming under pressure in this 
area – would AI help this or could criminals make use of it to hide criminal 
activity?
» What about legal malpractice – what would be the mechanism to challenge 
an AI inspired legal decision?
» How do we ensure no bias creeps into AI decision making processes? The 
software being trialled in the USA to determine a prisoner’s suitability for 
parole is already showing bias against black African Americans. How do 
we ensure such prejudices by governments and individuals when using AI 
systems is not allowed to occur?
457591_07_CI_AS & A_Level_CS_178-195.indd   192 25/04/19   9:52 AM