Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
43
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
5 What else you need to know 
This section is an overview of other information you need to know about this syllabus. It will help to share the 
administrative information with your exams officer so they know when you will need their support. Find more 
information about our administrative processes at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
Before you start
Previous study
We recommend that learners starting this course should have completed a course in Computer Science 
equivalent to Cambridge IGCSE™ or Cambridge O Level. 
Guided learning hours
We design Cambridge International AS & A Level syllabuses to require about 180 guided learning hours for 
each Cambridge International AS Level and about 360 guided learning hours for a Cambridge International 
A Level. The number of hours a learner needs to achieve the qualification may vary according to each school 
and the learners’ previous experience of the subject.
Availability and timetables 
All Cambridge schools are allocated to an administrative zone. Each zone has a specific timetable.  
Find your administrative zone at www.cambridgeinternational.org/adminzone  
You can view the timetable for your administrative zone at www.cambridgeinternational.org/timetables
You can enter candidates in the June and November exam series.  
Check you are using the syllabus for the year the candidate is taking the exam.
Private candidates can enter for this syllabus provided that the accommodating centre can make appropriate 
arrangements to conduct the practical paper. For more information, see the Cambridge Guide to Making 
Entries.
Combining with other syllabuses
Candidates can take this syllabus alongside other Cambridge International syllabuses in a single exam series. 
The only exceptions are:
 • Cambridge International AS & A Level Information and Communication Technology 9626
 • syllabuses with the same title at the same level.
Group awards: Cambridge AICE 
Cambridge AICE (Advanced International Certificate of Education) is a group award for Cambridge International  
AS & A Level. It encourages schools to offer a broad and balanced curriculum by recognising the achievements 
of learners who pass exams in a range of different subjects. 
Learn more about Cambridge AICE at www.cambridgeinternational.org/aice