Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus? 
5
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
Key concepts
Key concepts are essential ideas that help students develop a deep understanding of their subject and make 
links between different aspects. Key concepts may open up new ways of thinking about, understanding or 
interpreting the important things to be learned.  
Good teaching and learning will incorporate and reinforce a subject’s key concepts to help students gain:
 • a greater depth as well as breadth of subject knowledge
 • confidence, especially in applying knowledge and skills in new situations  
 • the vocabulary to discuss their subject conceptually and show how different aspects link together
 • a level of mastery of their subject to help them enter higher education.
The key concepts identified below, carefully introduced and developed, will help to underpin the course you will 
teach. You may identify additional key concepts which will also enrich teaching and learning. 
The key concepts for Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science are:
 • Computational thinking  
Computational thinking is a set of fundamental skills that help produce a solution to a problem. Skills such 
as abstraction, decomposition and algorithmic thinking are used to study a problem and design a solution 
that can be implemented. This may involve using a range of technologies and programming languages.
 • Programming paradigms  
A programming paradigm is a way of thinking about or approaching problems. There are many different 
programming styles that can be used, which are suited to unique functions, tools and specific situations. 
An understanding of programming paradigms is essential to ensure they are used appropriately, when 
designing and building programs.
 • Communication  
Communication is a core requirement of computer systems. It includes the ability to transfer data from one 
device or component to another and an understanding of the rules and methods that are used in this data 
transfer. Communication could range from the internal transfer of data within a computer system, to the 
transfer of a video across the internet.
 • Computer architecture and hardware  
Computer architecture is the design of the internal operation of a computer system. It includes the rules that 
dictate how components and data are organised, how data are communicated between components, to 
allow hardware to function. There is a range of architectures, with different components and rules, that are 
appropriate for different scenarios.  
All computers comprise of a combination of hardware components, ranging from internal components, 
such as the Central Processing Unit (CPU) and main memory, to peripherals. To produce effective 
and efficient programs to run on hardware, it is important to understand how the components work 
independently and together to produce a system that can be used. Hardware needs software to be able 
to perform a task. Software allows hardware to become functional. This enables the user to communicate 
with the hardware to perform tasks.
 • Data representation and structures  
Computers use binary and understanding how a binary number can be interpreted in many different ways 
is important. Programming requires an understanding of how data can be organised for efficient access 
and/or transfer.