Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
40
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
4 Details of the assessment 
The AS Level will be assessed through two external written papers. Both papers are compulsory.
 • Paper 1 – Theory Fundamentals
 • Paper 2 – Fundamental Problem-solving and Programming Skills
Paper 1 Theory Fundamentals will assess content described in this syllabus, sections 1 to 8. Candidates 
will answer a number of questions, requiring some short and some longer answers. The questions will test 
knowledge and understanding of the principles behind computer science as well as the application of these to 
solve problems.
Paper 2 Fundamental Problem-solving and Programming Skills will assess content described in this 
syllabus, sections 9 to 12. Candidates will answer a number of questions, requiring some short and 
some longer answers. The questions will test programming knowledge and skills. Candidates will not 
be required to write programming code. Candidates will be provided with an Insert to use in the exam 
with pseudocode built-in functions and operators. For more information on the pseudocode please see 
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
The A Level will be examined through four papers, papers 1 and 2 at AS Level plus:
 • Paper 3 – Advanced Theory (written paper)
 • Paper 4 – Practical
Paper 3 is a written paper and paper 4 is a practical programming paper carried out on a computer. Both 
papers are compulsory.
Paper 3 Advanced Theory will assess content described in this syllabus, sections 13 to 20. Candidates will 
answer a number of questions, requiring some short and some longer answers.
Paper 4 Practical will assess practical application of content described in the syllabus, sections 19 to 20, except 
for low-level and declarative programming. The programming tasks will be based around a small number of 
scenarios, candidates will be assessed on their ability to write programs or program elements to solve tasks. 
Centres must ensure that all candidates have access to computers that belong to the centre and these must 
not have internet access or access to email.
The source files given will not contain binary files.
Please see section 2: Assessment overview.
Submission of Paper 4 Practical
The evidence document supplied by Cambridge International should be saved with the centre number, 
candidate’s name and candidate’s number. At each stage in the assessment of Paper 4, candidates will be 
asked to copy program listings or take screenshots of results to paste into the evidence document. Candidates 
must save their work at regular intervals and centres are recommended to enable the auto save function. If 
there is no evidence of work in the evidence document, the work will not receive any marks.
Details of how to administer Paper 4 Practical can be found in the Cambridge Handbook  which is available on 
our website: www.cambridgeinternational.org/examsofficers