Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus? 
6
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
International recognition and acceptance
Our expertise in curriculum, teaching and learning, and assessment is the basis for the recognition of 
our programmes and qualifications around the world. Every year thousands of students with Cambridge 
International AS & A Levels gain places at leading universities worldwide. Our programmes and qualifications 
are valued by top universities around the world including those in the UK, US (including Ivy League universities), 
Europe, Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
UK ENIC, the national agency in the UK for the recognition and comparison of international qualifications and 
skills, has carried out an independent benchmarking study of Cambridge International AS & A Level and found 
it to be comparable to the standard of AS & A Level in the UK. This means students can be confident that their 
Cambridge International AS & A Level qualifications are accepted as equivalent, grade for grade, to UK AS & A 
Levels by leading universities worldwide.
Cambridge International AS Level Computer Science makes up the first half of the Cambridge International 
A Level course in Computer Science and provides a foundation for the study of Computer Science at 
Cambridge International A Level. The AS Level can also be delivered as a standalone qualification. Depending 
on local university entrance requirements, students may be able to use it to progress directly to university 
courses in Computer Science or some other subjects. It is also suitable as part of a course of general 
education. 
Cambridge International A Level Computer Science provides a foundation for the study of Computer Science or 
related courses in higher education. Equally it is suitable as part of a course of general education.
For more information about the relationship between the Cambridge International AS Level and Cambridge 
International A Level see the ‘Assessment overview’ section of the Syllabus overview.
We recommend learners check the Cambridge recognition database and university websites to find the most  
up-to-date entry requirements for courses they wish to study. 
Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/recognition