Why choose Cambridge International?
Cambridge International prepares school students for life, helping them develop an informed curiosity and a 
lasting passion for learning. We are part of the University of Cambridge.
Our Cambridge Pathway gives students a clear path for educational success from age 5 to 19. Schools can 
shape the curriculum around how they want students to learn – with a wide range of subjects and flexible ways 
to offer them. It helps students discover new abilities and a wider world, and gives them the skills they need for 
life, so they can achieve at school, university and work.
Our programmes and qualifications set the global standard for international education. They are created by 
subject experts, are rooted in academic rigour and reflect the latest educational research. They provide a 
strong platform for students to progress from one stage to the next, and are well supported by teaching and 
learning resources. Learn more about our research at www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/our-research/
We review all our syllabuses regularly, so they reflect the latest research evidence and professional teaching 
practice – and take account of the different national contexts in which they are taught.
We consult with teachers to help us design each syllabus around the needs of their learners. Consulting with 
leading universities has helped us make sure our syllabuses encourage students to master the key concepts in 
the subject and develop the skills necessary for success in higher education.
We believe education works best when curriculum, teaching, learning and assessment are closely aligned. 
Our programmes develop deep knowledge, conceptual understanding and higher-order thinking skills, to 
prepare students for their future. Together with schools, we develop Cambridge learners who are confident, 
responsible, reflective, innovative and engaged – equipped for success in the modern world.
Every year, nearly a million Cambridge students from 10 000 schools in 160 countries prepare for their future 
with the Cambridge Pathway. 
School feedback: ‘We think the Cambridge curriculum is superb preparation for university.’
Feedback from: Christoph Guttentag, Dean of Undergraduate Admissions, Duke University, USA
Quality management
Cambridge International is committed to providing exceptional quality. In line with this commitment, our 
quality management system for the provision of international education programmes and qualifications 
programmes for students aged 5 to 19 is independently certified as meeting the internationally recognised 
standard, ISO 9001:2015. Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/about-us/our-standards/
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment September 2023
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment. Cambridge University Press & 
Assessment is a department of the University of Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press & Assessment retains the copyright on all its publications. Registered centres are permitted to copy 
material from this booklet for their own internal use. However, we cannot give permission to centres to photocopy any material that is 
acknowledged to a third party even for internal use within a centre.