Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know 
44
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
Making entries
Exams officers are responsible for submitting entries to Cambridge International. We encourage them to work 
closely with you to make sure they enter the right number of candidates for the right combination of syllabus 
components. Entry option codes and instructions for submitting entries are in the Cambridge Guide to Making 
Entries. Your exams officer has access to this guide.
Exam administration
To keep our exams secure, we produce question papers for different areas of the world, known as 
administrative zones. We allocate all Cambridge schools to one administrative zone determined by their 
location. Each zone has a specific timetable. 
Some of our syllabuses offer candidates different assessment options. An entry option code is used to identify 
the components the candidate will take relevant to the administrative zone and the available assessment 
options.
Support for exams officers
We know how important exams officers are to the successful running of exams. We provide them with the 
support they need to make entries on time. Your exams officer will find this support, and guidance for all other 
phases of the Cambridge Exams Cycle, at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
Retakes and carrying forward marks
Candidates can retake Cambridge International AS Level and Cambridge International A Level as many times 
as they want to. Information on retake entries is at www.cambridgeinternational.org/retakes  
Candidates can carry forward the result of their Cambridge International AS Level assessment from one series 
to complete the Cambridge International A Level in a following series. The rules, time limits and regulations 
for carry-forward entries for staged assessment and carrying forward component marks can be found in the 
Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year of assessment at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
To confirm what entry options are available for this syllabus, refer to the Cambridge Guide to Making Entries  for 
the relevant series.
Language
This syllabus and the related assessment materials are available in English only.
Accessibility and equality
Syllabus and assessment design 
At Cambridge International, we work to avoid direct or indirect discrimination in our syllabuses and assessment 
materials. We aim to maximise inclusivity for candidates of all national, cultural or social backgrounds and 
candidates with protected characteristics, which include special educational needs and disability, religion and 
belief, and characteristics related to gender and identity. We also aim to make our materials as accessible as 
possible by using accessible language and applying accessible design principles. This gives all candidates the 
fairest possible opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge, skills and understanding and helps to minimise the 
requirement to make reasonable adjustments during the assessment process. 