Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know 
45
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements (including modified papers) are the principal way in which Cambridge International 
complies with our duty, as guided by the UK Equality Act (2010), to make ‘reasonable adjustments’ for 
candidates with special educational needs (SEN), disability, illness or injury. Where a candidate would otherwise 
be at a substantial disadvantage in comparison to a candidate with no SEN, disability, illness or injury, we 
may be able to agree pre-examination access arrangements. These arrangements help a candidate by 
minimising accessibility barriers and maximising their opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge, skills and 
understanding in an assessment. 
Important: 
Requested access arrangements should be based on evidence of the candidate’s barrier to assessment 
and should also reflect their normal way of working at school. This is explained in the Cambridge Handbook  
www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide  
 • For Cambridge International to approve an access arrangement, we will need to agree that it constitutes 
a reasonable adjustment, involves reasonable cost and timeframe and does not affect the security and 
integrity of the assessment. 
 • Availability of access arrangements should be checked by centres at the start of the course. Details of our 
standard access arrangements and modified question papers are available in  the Cambridge Handbook 
www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide  
 • Please contact us at the start of the course to find out if we are able to approve an arrangement that is not 
included in the list of standard access arrangements. 
 • Candidates who cannot access parts of the assessment may be able to receive an award based on the 
parts they have completed. 
After the exam
Grading and reporting
Grades a, b, c, d or e indicate the standard a candidate achieved at Cambridge International AS Level. ‘a’ is the 
highest and ‘e’ is the lowest grade. 
Grades A*, A, B, C, D or E indicate the standard a candidate achieved at Cambridge International A Level. A* is 
the highest and E is the lowest grade.
‘Ungraded’ means that the candidate’s performance did not meet the standard required for the lowest grade  
(E or e). ‘Ungraded’ is reported on the statement of results but not on the certificate. In specific circumstances  
your candidates may see one of the following letters on their statement of results:
 • Q (PENDING)
 • X (NO RESULT).
These letters do not appear on the certificate.
If a candidate takes a Cambridge International A Level and fails to achieve grade E or higher, a Cambridge 
International AS Level grade will be awarded if both of the following apply:
 • the components taken for the Cambridge International A Level by the candidate in that series included all 
the components making up a Cambridge International AS Level
 • the candidate’s performance on the AS Level components was sufficient to merit the award of a Cambridge 
International AS Level grade.