Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus? 
7
www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevelBack to contents page
Supporting teachers
We believe education is most effective when curriculum, teaching and learning, and assessment are closely  
aligned. We provide a wide range of resources, detailed guidance, innovative training and targeted professional 
development so that you can give your students the best possible preparation for Cambridge International  
AS & A Level. To find out which resources are available for each syllabus go to 
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support  
The School Support Hub is our secure online site for Cambridge teachers where you can find the resources 
you need to deliver our programmes. You can also keep up to date with your subject and the global Cambridge 
community through our online discussion forums.  
Find out more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
Support for Cambridge International AS & A Level
Planning and 
preparation
 • Syllabuses
 • Schemes of work
 • Specimen Question 
Papers and Mark 
Schemes
 • Teacher guides
Teaching and 
assessment
 • Endorsed resources
 • Online forums
Learning and revision
 • Example candidate 
responses
 • Past papers and 
mark schemes
Results
 • Candidate Results 
Service
 • Principal examiner 
reports for teachers
Sign up for email notifications about changes to syllabuses, including new and revised products and services, 
at www.cambridgeinternational.org/syllabusupdates
Syllabuses and specimen materials represent the final authority on the content and structure of all of our 
assessments.
Professional development
Find the next step on your professional development journey.
 • Introductory Professional Development – An introduction to Cambridge programmes and qualifications.  
 • Extension Professional Development – Develop your understanding of Cambridge programmes and 
qualifications to build confidence in your delivery. 
 • Enrichment Professional Development – Transform your approach to teaching with our Enrichment 
workshops. 
 • Cambridge Professional Development Qualifications (PDQs) – Practice-based programmes that transform 
professional learning for practising teachers. Available at Certificate and Diploma level. 
Find out more at: 
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support-and-training-for-schools/professional-development/
Supporting exams officers
We provide comprehensive support and guidance for all Cambridge exams officers.  
Find out more at: www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide